Repetitions 45
Expanse and Filiation 47
Closed Place, Open Word 63
Concerning a Baroque Abroad in the World 77
Concerning the Poem's Information 81
Creolizations
Dictate, Decree
PATHS
To Build the Tower
Transparency and Opacity
The Black Beach
89
91
103
III
121THEORIES
Relation
The Relative and Chaos
Distancing, Determining
That That
Relinked, (Relayed), Related
POETICS
Generalization
That Those Beings Be Not Being
For Opacity
Open Circle, Lived Relation
The Burning Beach
Notes
References
x
131
133
141
159
169
183
lB5
189
195
205
211
225Translator's Introduction
Betsy Wing
'Je bâtis a roches mon langage."
(1 build my language with rocks.)
-Glissant, L'Intention poétique
The sturnbIing blocks of a translation frequently exist at its
most productive points. Their usual first effect is frustration
caused by obstinate resistance (on both sides), but, in their
ever-renewed demand for conjecture, these apparent obstacles can allow us to escape the cramped, habituaI postures of
our own thought. This is the hoped-for reward of transIators-whose first work is to be attentive, even hopeful readers-then, with as many premonitions of disaster as prospects
of opening possibilities within their own languages, they
must confront the task of rnaking these new openings available to new readers.
AlI of Édouard Glissant's work, as a poet, novelist, playwright, or theoretician from the very beginning (Les Indes
and Soleil de la conscience [1956], La Lézarde [1959]) has been
concerned with exploring the possibilities of a language that
wouid be fully Antillean. Such a language would be capable
of writing the Antilles into history, generating a conception
of time, finding a past and founding a future. It would escape
the passivity associated with an imposed language of fixed
forms (French) as weIl as the folklore traps of a language thatis no longer one of material production, its vocabulary fixed
because stagnant (Creole). This Antillean language would
provide the means for this place and its people to relate to
the world as one among equivalent entities. Carrying the
work of other theorists of Caribbean self..formation, such as
Fanon and Césaire, into new dimensions, Glissant sees imagination as the force that can change mentalities; relation as
the process of this change; and poetics as a transformative
mode of history.
In an carly collection of essays, L1ntention jJoétique (1969),
Glissant made it dear that he had no interest in rejecting the
language he speaks (French); his purpose would be better
served by actions within it, by interrogating il. By the passionate intensity of his way of being in this language, he
would force the Other to know his difference. He repeatedly
destabilizes "standard" French in order to decategorize
understandings and establish new relations, so that the constant transformation always at work in any living symbolic system, passing into the particularity of Antillean experience,
can form the vibrant grounds for a full and productive participation among world cultures now and in the future.
Throughout the body of his work Glissant has combined
the discipline of analytical thought with a determined refusaI
to accept the logic of Iinear sequences as the only productive
logic. For a country whose history is composed of ruptures, to
accept this linearity would imply a continued blindness to its
own crazed history, its temps éPerdu, and acceptance of the
"YVestern European episternological principles that daim this
history as its destiny. The structure of Poetics of Relation is
based more on associative principles than on any steady
progress toward irrefutable proof; it is an enactment of its
own poetics. Providing a sense of the new relations created in
its language as a whole-its transforming ecology-was the
greatest challenge for an Arnerican English version.
The first and most obvious difficulty is presented by particular incidents in which Glissant forces new word complexes to put forward concepts of major importance to his
XlItheory. The new phrases in French, of course, are just as
likely to stop readers in their tracks as abruptly as they do in
English. Indeed, this is Glissant's intent-to provide sudden
contact with an unforeseen relation in language, not unlike
the collisions between cultures that he sees as productive of
Relation. The most acute need here is to provide the same
level of dues in an American English as those existing in the
first version-preferably a formula both elegant and concrete but undornesticated, not subject to common linguistic
usage, a mental image ready to create a new connection. Glissant himself frequently sets the new term within its definition
(though not necessarily at its first occurrence), letting context indicate the potential for expansion in its meaning. But
the slightly changing contexts and Glissant's insistence that a
single term serve in every instance created difficulties not
presented by words in current usage, in which local solutions
are usually best. An example of this is agents d'éclat, which 1
have consistently translated as flash agents (having rejected a
long list of candidates such as dazzlers, glamour mongers, etc., as
suiting only one or two occurrences). This phrase indudes,
but is not limited to, our category The Media, with aIl the
implications of shallowness, dazzle, and hegemony that this
implies for us. But, as always in Poetics ofRelation, activity in a
concrete world is important; physical notions of the dazzling,
explosive power of this agency cannot be left out. Think:
flash in the pan for shallowness, the strobing flash of momentary glamour, the news flash in a sound byte frorn our
sources.
Glissant creates these rnetaphorical noun phrases to name
the reality he sees emerging in the world. Frorn the point of
view of the Métropole (Real France), Martinique and the
other islands of the Antilles can seem to be "dust-specks on
the sea," as DeGaulle, looking down from a plane, is said to
have described them. To become other than dust, aggregating their scattered and lost histories into a concrete presence
in this world-this totality-world (totalité-monde, henceforth
untranslated)-the Antilles must assert their dense, opaque,
xiiirock-hard existence, as do the noun-phrases Glissant uses to
push at the limitations of French. Part of controlling the substance of one's future would lie in controlling its nomenclature.
Agents-d'éclat is a terse example of the merging of various
discourses in Glissant's work. Agents-has resonance in everyday language (agents de presse, etc.) but also carries overtones
of political agency. Éclat (and éclater; the verb) is frequently
repeated throughout Glissant's poetry and prose. Éclat in the
case of agents d'éclat has a somewhat prejorative sense. It is the
sort of dazzle that can cause a people to lose its footing. In
numerous other instances, hm,vever, it represents the sudden
movement, the explosion onto the contemporary scene of
"marginal" peoples, and the possible brilliance of their future.
Always it is metaphorical and poetic.
Another word complex, the verbal phrase: donner-avec,
relays the concept of understanding into the world of Relation, translating, contesting, then reconstituting its elements
in a new order. The French word for understanding, comprendre, like its English cognate, is formed on the basis of the Latin
word, c01nprehendere, "to seize," which is formed from the roots:
con- (with) and prendere (to take). Glissant contrasts this form
of understanding-appropriative, almost rapacious-with the
understanding upon which Relation must be based: donneravec. Donner (to give) is meant as a generosity of perception.
(In French donner' can mean "to look out tmvard.") There is
also the possible sense of yielding, as a tree might "give" in a
storm in order to remain standing. Avec both reflects back on
the corn- of comjJTendr-e and defines the underlying principle of
Relation. Gives-ort-and-with is unwieldy, but unfamiliar tools
are ahvays awkward.
Balking at the task of translation is a questionable practice
for a translator, but, along with totalité-monde, certain of Glissant's coinages remain here in French.* In sorne cases, no
*Untranslated French v,rords are fmther discussed in lhe notes to the
text or glossary.
XIVmatter how they were rendered in English, short of writing a
complete sentence at each occurrence, a significant portion
of the sense was gone. The finaljudgment came down to the
use value of the translated words, the use (not necessariIy
usual) of the sign in question. While the best of translations
can impart new levels of meaning to common words, an additional layer of impenetrability is of little or no use.* Three
related images of the world set forth by Glissant: la totalité-
monde, les échos-monde, and le chaos-monde, have been left
untranslated here, therefore, not only because of the inherent difficulty in translating them concisely but also because
they function as neologisms-no more instantly acceptable
in French than in American English; (though, following the
same principle, the translation includes many dutiful, if not
inspired, neologisms-for example, flash agents, etc.). More
important, the problern lies in their structure, which cannot
be duplicated in English. The article clearly modifies the first
element (la totalité, les échos, le chaos), but the second elernent
(monde) is not a mere modifier, as it would appear to be if the
normal English reversaI of terms took place (that is, worldtotality, world-echoes, world-chaos). In fact, in this third instance
aIl the implications of ordered chaos implicit in chaos theory
would slip away, leaving the banality of world disorder. Nor
are these guises of the world (the world as totality, etc.); they
are identities of the world. The world is totality (concrete and
quantifiable), echoes (feedback), and chaos (spiraling and
redundant trajectories), aIl at once, depending on our many
ways of sensing and addressing it.
From the beginning of the text, in addition to these compoundings, there are idiosyncratic usages that erupt and
rernain, assertively subsisting through repetition.** Errantry
*This is not entirely true. To a student of ideologies they surely mark
interesting moments when the languages, as perceived by a particular
translator, are mutually resistant beyond repair.
**Glissant's particular use of the words langue and langage as well as
imaginaire is discussed both in the notes and glossary.
xv(errance) wiIl be the first of these. Here Glissant stresses overtones of sacred mission rather than aimless wandering;
errance, its ending linked for the contemporary reader with
deconstruction's validation of difJémnce, deflects the negative
associations between errer (to wander) and erreur (error).
Directed by Relation, errantry follows neither an arrowlike
trajectory nor one that is circular and repetitive, nor is it
mere wandering-idle roaming. Wandering, one might
become lost, but in errantry one knows at every moment
where one is-at every moment in relation to the other. This
is a word in which Glissant's literary formation, his "high" culture voice, is particularly apparent. A word out of the past, it
is retrieved for the use of a people weakened and oppressed
as much by imposed cultural interpretations as anything else;
so that it enters the spiraling, transformative mode of Relation, in which every voice can be heard and aIl can be said.
Brought at the age of ten to Fort-de-France, Glissant received the best of French colonial education at the Lycée
Schoelcher, where Aimé Césaire was the "prof" of modern
languages. Like other children in the colonies dependent
on France, he too had to learn about "nos ancetres les
gaulois"-those spurious ancestors who had somehow buried
the genetic ancestors in nonhistory. He also read the same
"classics" of Western literature, probably encountering what
he describes as the great book of Mediterranean intelligence,
the Odyssey, at precisely the same moment in his development
as every French schoolboy in the Métropole. And, like other
intellectually promising youths in the 1940s, prepared to
become "more French than the French," his own odyssey, his
errantry, took him from Martinique to pursue education to
its farthest reaches-the level of the doctomt d'état-in Paris.
Creole is Glissant's "mother" tongue but remains truly
that-a language of intimacy and friendship. French, the language ofempowerment in Martinique, is his "natural" (that is,
culturally provided) literary language. But it is important to
Glissant that he write a French different from the so-called
standard French of the Métropole: one made supple by CreXVIole, one ready to incorporate aIl the aspects of its fonnation,
one cognizant of the history of the Antillean people and ready
to imagine for thern both past and future. His analysis of the
problems in Martinique emphasizes the irnpact of widespread, active repression of those parts of the not-quite-Iost
history considered shameful (where the mulatto elite is still
more likely to hark back to sorne imagined Carib ancestor
than to its Mrican heritage). But though the first rupture with
history occurred at the Middle Passage with the irnposition of
slavery and the French language, retrieving the history itwould-be-possible-to-know does not mean refusing the
imposed French-now unquestionably part ofwhat is sought
in a quest for cultural self-definition. Vtilization, (outilization) ,
tooling of the past to serve the present, is Glissant's work.
The word errantry has archaic overtones in English that,
though not necessarily present in errance, do play an interesting part elsewhere in Glissant's writing. French readers of
Glissant's work would have a very c1ear sense that his vocabulary was not entirely that of mainland France, that it was
something particular, Antillean perhaps, and his use of
archaisms would be one of the cIues.* The cIassical definition
listed in the dictionary is frequently the one that suits the
context-the usage example will be from Racine or
Corneille. This practice, while a mark of Glissant's cIassical
French education, also bears traces of the isolation of the culture of Martinique. There are words still in use on the islands
that have slipped from current usage elsewhere. They provide a certain formality of tone, which is frequently aIl 1 have
been able to salvage of their effect in French, but the translation contains a few lurking archaisms drawn in general from
the cIassics-burdened, educated V.S. South.
It is even more difficult to give any sense of the Creolisms
*A few examples of this are Glissant's use of the word héler; common
enough in Martinique for "ta calI out"; orroidissement, an old form of
raidissement, "stiffening"; or convoyer; meaning "to convey" more than "to
convoy."
xviithat are at work in Poeties of Relation. In the case of Creole
words, only when there was some American idiom that did
not trivialize Glissant's thought or lend it an air of the ridiculous did 1 attempt to mark the term with any particular
effect.* Simply sprinkling his text with Creole words, however, would accomplish very little for Glissant. It is the structural elements of Creole that are most important ta his pr~ject of creating a language adequate to Antillean experience.
This Antillean French would not leave Creole ta languish in
folklore or preciosity but would use sorne of its working principles.
In Creole, as in the African languages that formed its syntax, the limits between classes of words are less watertight
than in French. That is, a noun may work as a verb, or vice
versa, without calling undue attention ta itself.l Other contemporary writers have employed this practice ta escape
hypercoded language constructions and ta stress the transformative nature oftheir own writing. The demiurgic voice of
Glissant's "prof," the first great Martinican poet, Aimé
Césaire: "1 who Krakatoa ... who Zambezi ... " cornes to
mind. 2 Another writer of cultural transformation, Hélene
Cixous, part of whose poetic praxis depends on canceling
"fixed" barriers to empower women, also makes frequent use
of this device. 3 Such crossovers play a part in Glissant's
attempts to render French more supple. They also work as
instances of métissage, a ward whose primary use describes the
racial intermixing within a colony and its contemporary
aftermath but which Glissant uses especially to affirm the
multiplicity and diversity of beings in Relation. On a larger
*Examplcs here would he: d'un seul bnlan (Poétique. 21R). Bnlan is Creole for "soaring, flight, speed," etc., which the idiom "at one feU swoop"
translated well; and L'iri-la (Poétique, 204), which has the sound of
modernity we are accustomed to hnding in French critical thought of
the late tlventieth century, but marked here by the directness of country speech: "this-here." A few Creole words remain untranslated but
defined in the glossary. A'i Glissant remarked, 'The English readers are
going to know more than the French."
xviiiscale the inclusion of various sorts of writing-the familiar,
the poetic, the hortatory, the aphoristic, the expositorywithout placing more value on one than another, works
tmvard a similar synthesis.
Creole culture in Martinique still interrelates with the syncretic and oppositional practices of Vodou, in which the
future may be influenced, among other ways, by Vévés, figures
traced on the ground. Glissant is very attentive to textual
geography: punctuation, rnarkers, spacing. In aIl of his writing, including Poetics of Relation, this graphie element is
important-much as one expects it to be in poetry. Vodou's
rites of transformation project the world as it should be; Glissant projects language as it should be. Even his use of suffixes
and creation of cornpound words with their ritual dash plays
a part in this geographical writing.
Strategies of orality, present in Creole, continue to mark
spoken French in Martinique and lend an oracular tone to
Glissant's language. One word will unleash another through
association or sorne deeper, almost subconscious logic into
powerfully rhythmic sentences. The discontinuities in the
text, the melding of discursive syntax with a language whose
beat is punctuated by repetition and improvization (La Cité
de Platon est pour Platon, la vision de Hegel pour Hegel, la
ville du griot pour la griot" [Poétique, 208]), provide alrnost
constant examples of this.
This oral tradition remains clearly present in the Creole
proverbs and sayings that constitute the familial' wisdom of
Martinique. These formulations exempliry continuity but in
form are discontinuous. When this form is employed by a
philosopher, it is referred to as "aphorism," and, when the
surroundings of these discontinuous statements are lost in
history, we think of them as "fragments." The section of Poetics of Relation entitled "That Those Beings Be Not Being," a
sequence of oracular riddles, at first (and finally) leads to
comparisons with Heraclitus, but the suitability of their structure to Glissant's project lies in its reproduction of one of
Creole's most enduring aspects: the proverb forrn-memoxixrable because it is concise, repetItIOUS, rhythmic, and
opaque. Though Creole may be based on a "succession of
forgettings" (83), its formaI structures can be used to induce
memory.
Glissant's intent, finally, is to realize Relation in concrete
terms-in which language is made of rocks and words and in
which the future can be made to open for the Antilles by
beating a time other than the linear, sequential order of syntax. Verb, noun, subject, object, are not fixed in their places
because, in the words of Glissant, "in Relation every subject is
an object and every object a subject."
NOTES
1. Dictionnaire Créole Français, by Ralph Ludwig, Daniele Montbrand,
Hector Pouillet, and Sylviane TeIchid (Paris: Servedit/Éditions .lassor, 1990), 12.
2. Aimé Césaire, "Lost Body," The Collecter! Poell)', trans. Clayton
Eshleman and Annette Smith (Berkeley: University of California
Press, 1983),243.
3. See Hélene Cixous, The Book of Promethm, trans. Betsy Wing (Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press, 1991), xi, 9.
xxGlossary
"Glossary: for readersfrom elsewhere, who don't deal very
weIl with unknown words or who want to understand
everything. But, perhaps to establish for ourselves,
ourselves as weIl, the long list of words within us whose
sense escapes or, taking this farther, to fix the syntax of
this language we are babbling. The readers ofhere are
future."
-Édouard Glissant, Malemort, 231
(Words discussed ln the introduction or notes are not
included here.)
antillanité: "A method and not a state of being," according to
Glissant. Contrast this with his idea ofwhat creolité (creoleness) is about. Antillanité is grounded concretely in
affirmation of a place, the Antilles, and would link cultures
across language barriers. Dash translates this as
"Caribbeanness" in Caribbean Discoune.
békés: Creole word used originally to designate the white
planters but now also any of their (white) descendants in
Martinique.
careme: The dry season. Martinique has only two seasons: the
rainy season, hivernage, and the dry, careme.
djobs, djobeurs: Odd jobs and those who do them. These
words, derived from the English word job, designate the
widespread, rnarginal economy dependent on the scrapsand bits (of work and material) that no one in the more
affluent sector wants.
Gehenna: A heU, a place of fiery torment.
gommier: Traditional sailboat still raced along the coast of
Martinique.
imaginary: Glissant's sense differs from the commonsense
English usage of a conception that is a conscious nlental
image. Furthermore, the now widely accepted Lacanian
sense in which the Imaginary, the order of perception and
hallucination, is contrasted with the Symbolic (the order
of discursive and symbolic action) and the Real (not just
"reality" but what is absolutely unrepresentable) does not
apply. For Glissant the imaginary is aIl the ways a culture
has of perceiving and conceiving of the world. Bence,
every human culture will have its own particular irnaginary.
laghia: A traditional dance that takes the form of a battle.
Lamentin: An industrial city in whose mangrove swamps Glis···
sant and his friends played as children. The Lézarde River
flowed, now trickles through, and the backfilled swamps
are now developed into the airport of Martinique.
mabi: A drink made from bois magi (Collubrina elliptica) and
the peel of mandarines.
marlou: A sweet drink made with limes.
manchineel: A plant found growing side by sicle with the seaolive on the beaches of Martinique. When touched, the
fruit of the manchineel inflicts painful burns that the leaf
of the sea-olive can heal.
marronage, marrons: The marrons, "Maroons," are the fugitive slaves, and manonage, originally the political act of
these slaves who escaped into the forested hills of Martinique, now designates a form of cultural opposition to
European-American culture. This resistance takes its
strength from a combination of geographical connectedness (essential ta survival in the jungle and absent in the
descendants of slaves-alienated from the land that could
never be theirs), memory (retained in oral forms and
xxiivodou ritual), and aIl the canny detours, diversions, and
ruses required to deflect the repeated attempts to recuperate this cultural subversion.
mornes: The hills rising abruptly behind the Caribbean
beaches in Martinique. Deeply forested in places still, they
are the savage and life-preserving land in which the
Maroons took refuge.
Pitons: The high,jagged, voIcanic mountains.
Quechua: Amerindians of South America known for their
obstinate silence.
yole: Traditional skiff used by Martinican fishermen.
zouc: Martinican dance music.
XXIllPOETICS OF RELATIONIMAGINARY
~~
Thinking thought usually amounts to withdrawing into a
dimensionless place in which the idea of thought alone
persists. But thought in reality spaces itselfout into the world.
It informs the imaginary ofpeoPles, their varied poetics, which
it then transforms, meaning, in them its risk becomes realized.
Culture is the precaution ofthose who claim to think thought
but who steer clear ofits chaotic journey. Evolving cultures
infer Relation, the overstepping that grounds their unitydiversity.
Thought draws the imaginary ofthe past: a knowledge
becoming. One cannot stop it to assess it nor isolate it to
transmit it. It is sharing one can never not retain, nor ever, in
standing still, boast about.1
APPROACHES
One way ashore, a thousand channelsThe Open Boat
For the AfrIcans who lived through the experience of deportation to the Arnericas,* confronting the unknown with neither preparation nor challenge was no doubt petrifying.
The first dark shadow was cast by being wrenched from
their everyday, familiar land, away frorn protecting gods and
a tutelary community. But that is nothing yet. Exile can be
borne, even when it cornes as a boit from the blue. The second dark of night fell as tortures and the deterioration of
person, the result of so many incredible Gehennas. Imagine
two hundred hurnan beings crarnrned into a space barely
capable of containing a third of them. Imagine vomit, naked
fIesh, swarming lice, the dead slumped, the dying crouched.
Imagine, ifyou can, the swirling red ofmounting to the deck,
the ramp they clirnbed, the black sun on the horizon, vertigo,
*The Slave Trade came through the cramped doorway of the slave ship,
leaving a wake like that of crawling desert caravans. It might be drawn
like this: ~ Mrican countries to the East; the lands of America
to the West. This creature is in the image of a fibril.
Mrican languages became deterritorialized, thus contributing to
creolization in the West. This is the most completely known confrontation between the powers of the written word and the impulses of orality. The only written thing on slave ships was the account book listing
the exchange value of slaves. Within the ship's space the cry of those
deported was stifled, as it would be in the realm of the Plantations. This
confrontation still reverberates to this day.this dizzying sky plastered to the waves. Over the course of
more than two centuries, twenty, thirty million people
deported. Worn down, in a debasement more eternal than
apocalypse. But that is nothing yet.
What is terrifying partakes of the abyss, three times linked
ta the unknown. First, the time you fell into the belly of the
boat. For, in your poetic vision, a boat has no be11y; a boat
does not swallow up, does not devour; a boat is steered by
open skies. Yet, the belly of this boat dissolves you, precipitates you into a nonworld from which you cry out. This boat
is a womb, a womb abyss. It generates the clamor of your
protests; it also produces aIl the coming unanirnity. Although
you are alone in this suffering, you share in the unknown
with others whom you have yet to know. This boat is your
vvomb, a matrix, and yet it expels you. This boat: pregnant
with as many dead as living under sentence of death.
The next abyss was the depths of the sea. Whenever a fleet of
ships gave chase to slave ships, it was easiestjust to lighten the
boat by throwing cargo overboard, weighing it down with
balls and chains. These underwater signposts mark the
course between the Gold Coast and the Leeward Islands.
Navigating the green splendor of the sea-whether in melancholic transatlantic crossings or glorious regattas or traditional races of yoles and gommiers--still brings to mind, coming to light like seaweed, these lowest depths, these deeps,
with their punctuation of scarce1y corroded balls and chains.
In actual fact the abyss is a tautology: the entire ocean, the
entire sea gently collapsing in the end into the pleasures of
sand, make one vast beginning, but a beginning whose time
is marked by these balls and chains gone green.
But for these shores to take shape, even before they could be
contemplated, before they were yet visible, what sufferings
came from the unknown! Indeed, the most petrifying face of
the abyss lies far ahead of the slave ship's bow, a pale murmur; you do not know if it is a storm cloud, rain or drizzle, or
6smoke from a comforting fi.re. The banks of the river have
vanished on both sides of the boat. What kind of river, then,
has no middle? Is nothing there but straight ahead? Is this
boat sailing into eternity toward the edges of a nonworld that
no ancestor will haunt?
Paralleling this mass ofwater, the third metamorphosis of the
abyss thus projects a reverse image of aIl that had been left
behind, not to be regained for generations except-more
and more threadbare-in the blue savannas of memory or
imagination.
The asceticism of crossing this way the land-sea that,
unknown to you, is the planet Earth, feeling a language vanish, the word of the gods vanish, and the sealed image of even
the most everyday object, of even the most familiar animal,
vanish. The evanescent taste of what you ate. The hounded
scent of ochre earth and savannas.
'Je te salue, vieil Océan!" Vou still preserve on your crests the
silent boat of our births, your chasrns are our own unconscious, furrowed with fugitive memories. Then you lay out
these new shores, where we hook our tar-streaked wounds,
our reddened mouths and stifled outcries.
Experience of the abyss lies inside and outside the abyss. The
torment of those who never escaped it: straight from the beUy
of the slave ship into the violet belly of the ocean depths they
went. But their ordeal did not die; it quickened into this continuous/discontinuous thing: the panic of the new land, the
haunting of the former land, finally the alliance with the
imposed land, suffered and redeemed. The unconscious
memory of the abyss served as the alluvium for these metamorphoses. The populations that then formed, despite having forgotten the chasm, despite being unable to irnagine the
passion of those who foundered there, nonetheless wove this
sail (a veil). They did not use it to return to the Former Land
7but rose up on this unexpected, dumbfounded land. They
met the first inhabitants, who had also been deported by permanent havoc; or perhaps they only caught a whiff of the ravaged trail of these people. The land-beyond turned into landin~itself. And this undreamt of sail, finally now spread, is
watered by the white wind of the abyss. Thus, the absolute
unknown, projected by the abyss and bearing into eternity
the WOITlb abyss and the infinite abyss, in the end became
knowledge.
Notjust a specific knowledge, appetite, suffering, and delight
of one particular people, not only that, but knowledge of the
Whole, greater from having been at the abyss and freeing
knowledge of Relation within the Whole.
Just as the first uprooting was not marked by any defiance, in
the Sénne way the prescience and actual experience of Relation have nothing to do with vanity. Peoples who have been
to the abyss do not brag of being chosen. They do not believe
they are giving birth to any modern force. They live Relation
and clear the way for it, to the extent that the oblivion of the
abyss cornes to them and that, consequently, their memory
intensifies.
For though this experience made you, O1iginal victim floating toward the sea's abysses, an exception, it became something shared and made us, the descendants, one people
among others. Peoples do not live on exception. Relation is
not made up of things that are foreign but of shared knowledge. This experience of the abyss can now be said to be the
best element of exchange.
For us, and without exception, and no matter how much distance we ITlay keep, the abyss is also a projection of and a perspective into the unknown. Beyond its chasm we gamble on
the unknown. We take sides in this game of the world. We
hail a renewed Indies; we are for it. And for this Relation
8made ofstorms and profound moments ofpeace in which we
may honor our boats.
This is why we stay with poetry. And despite our consenting to
aIl the indisputable technologies; despite seeing the political
leap that must be managed, the hOITor of hunger and ignorance, torture and massacre to be conquered, the fullioad of
knowledge to be tamed, the weight of every piece of machinery that we shaH finally control, and the exhausting flashes as
we pass from one era to another-from forest to city, from
story to computer-at the bow there is still sornething we
now share: this murmur, cloud or rain or peaceful srnoke. We
know ourselves as part and as crowd, in an unknown that
does not terrify. We cry our cry of poetry. Our boats are open,
and we sail them for everyone.
9Err"antry, Exile
Roots make the commonality of errantryl and exile, for in
bath instances roots are lacking. We must begin with that.2
Gilles Deleuze and Felix Guattari criticized notions of the
root and, even perhaps, notions of being rooted. The root is
unique, a stock taking aIl upon itse1f and killing aIl around it.
In opposition ta this they propose the rhizome, an enmeshed
root system, a network spreading either in the ground or in
the air, with no predatory rootstock taking over permanently.
The notion of the rhizorne maintains, therefore, the idea of
rootedness but challenges that of a totalitarian root. Rhizomatic thought is the principle behind what 1 calI the Poetics of Relation, in which each and every identity is extended
through a relationship with the Other.
These authors extol nornadism, which supposedly liberates Being, in contrast, perhaps, ta a settled way of life, with
its law based upon the intolerant root. Already Kant, at the
beginning of Critique of Pure Reason, had seen similarities
between skeptics and nomads, remarking also that, from
time ta tirne, "they break the social bond." He seems thus ta
establish correlations between, on the one hand, a settled
way of life, truth, and society and, on the other, nomadisrn,
skepticism, and anarchy. This paralleI with Kant suggests that
the rhizome concept appears interesting for its anticonformism, but one cannot infer from this that it is subversive
or that rhizomatic thought has the capacity ta overturn the
Ilorder of the world-because, by so doing, one reverts to ideological claims presumably challenged by this thought. 3
But is the nomad not overdetermined by the conditions of
his existence? Rather than the enjoyment of freedom, is
nomadism not a form of obedience to contingencies that are
restrictive? Take, f<Jr example, circulaI' nomadism: each time
a portion of the territory is exhausted, the group moves
around. Its function is to ensure the survival of the group by
means of this circularity. This is the nomadism practiced by
populations that move [rom one part of the forest to another,
by the Arawak communities who navigated from island to
island in the Caribbean, by hired laborers in their pilgrimage
from farm to farm, by circus people in their peregrinations
from village to village, aIl of whom are driven by sorne
specifie need to move, in which daring or aggression play no
part. CirculaI' nomadism is a not-intolerant fornl of an impossible settlement.
Contrast this with invading nomadism, that of the Huns,
for example, or the Conquistadors, whose goal was to conquel' lands by exterminating their occupants. Neither prudent nor circular nomadism, it spares no effect. It is an
absolute forward projection: an arrowlike nomadism. But the
descendants of the Huns, Vandals, or Visigoths, as indeed
those of the Conquistadors, who established their clans, settled down bit by bit, melting into their conquests. Arrowlike
nomadism is a devastating desire for settlement.*
Neither in arrowlike nomadism nor in circulaI' nomadism
are roots valid. Before it is won through conquest, what
"holds" the invader is what lies ahead; moreover, one could
alrnost say that being compelled to lead a settled way of life
* The idea that this devastation can tum history around in a positive
manner (in relation to the decline ofthe Roman Empire, for example)
and beget sorne fertile negative element does not concern us here.
Generally speaking, what is meant is that arrowlike nomadism gives
birth to new eras, whereas circular nomadism would be endogenous
and without a future. This is a pure and simple legitimation of the act
of conquest.
12would constitute the real uprooting of a circular nomad.
There is, furthermore, no pain of exile bearing down, nor is
there the wanderlust of errantry growing keener. Relation to
the earth is too immediate or too plundering to be Iinked
with any preoccupation with identity-this daim to or consciousness of a lineage inscribed in a territory. Identity will be
achieved when communities attempt to legitimate their right
to possession of a territory through myth or the revealed
word. Such an assertion can predate its actual accomplishment by quite sorne time. Thus, an often and long contested
legitimacy will have rnultiple forms that later will delineate
the afflicted or soothing dimensions of exile or errantry.
In Western antiquity a man in exile does not feel he is
helpless or inferior, because he does not feel burdened with
deprivation-of a nation that for him does not yet exist. It
even seems, if one is to believe the biographies of numerous
Greek thinkers induding Plato and Aristotle, that sorne experience of voyaging and exile is considered necessary for a
being's cornplete fulfillment. Plato was the first to attempt to
base legitimacy not on community within territory (as it was
before and would be later) but on the City in the rationality
of its laws. This at a time when his city, Athens, was already
threatened bya "final" deregulation.*
In this period identification is with a culture (conceived of
as civilization), not yet with a nation.** The pre-Christian
West along with pre-Columbian America, Africa of the time
of the great conquerors, and the Asian kingdoms aIl shared
this mode of seeing and feeling. The relay of actions exerted
*Platonic Dialogues take over the function of the Myth. The latter
establishes the legitimacy of the possession of a territory based usually
on the uninterrupted rigors of filiation. The Dialogue establishes the
City's justice based on the revelation of a superior reason organizing
rigorous successions of a political order.
**Through the entirely Western notion of civilization the experience of
a society is summed up, in order to project it immediately into an evolution, most often an expansion as weIl. When one says civilization, the
immediate implication is a will to civilize. This idea is linked to the passion to impose civilization on the Other.
13by arrowlike nomadism and the settled way of lite were first
directed against generalization (the drive for an identifying
universal as practiced by the Roman Empire). Thus, the particular resists a generalizing universal and soon begets
specific and local senses of identity, in concentric circles
(provinces then nations). The idea of civilil.ation, hit hy hit,
helps hold together opposites, whose only former identity
existed in their opposition to the Other.
During this period of invading nomads the passion fôr
self-definition first appears in the guise of personal adventure. Along the route of their voyages conquerors established
empires that collapsed at their death. Their capitals went
where they wen t. "Rome is no longer in Rome, it is wherevcr
1 am." The root is not important. Movement is. The idea of
errantry, still inhibited in the face of this mad reality, this toofunctional nomaelism, whose enels it coulel not know, eloes
not yet make an appearance. Center and periphery are equivaIent. Conquerors are the moving, transient root of their
people.
The '!\Test, therefore, is where this movement becomes
fixed and nations declare themselves in preparation for their
repercussions in the world. This fixing, this declaration, this
expansion, aIl require that the idea of the root gradually take
on the intolerant sense that Deleuze and Guattari, no doubt,
mean t to challenge. The reason for our return to this episode
in Western history is that it spread throughout the world. The
mode! came in handy. Most of the nations that gained heedom from colonization have tended to form around an idea
of power·-the totalitarian drive of a single, unique rootrather than around a fundamental relationship with the
Other. Culture's self-conception was dualistic, pitting citizen
against barbarian. Nothing has ever more solidly opposed
the thought of errantry than this period in human history
when Western nations were established and then made their
impact on the wodd.
At first this thought of errantry, bucking the current of
nationalist expansion, was disguised "within" very personal-
14ized adven tures-just as the appearance of Western nations
had been preceded by the ventures of empire builders. The
errantry of a troubadour or that of Rimbaud is not yet a thorough, thick (opaque) experience of the world, but it is
already an arrant, passionate desire to go against a root. The
reality of exile during this period is felt as a (temporary) lack
that priInarily concerns, interestingly enough, language.
Western nations were established on the basis of linguistic
intransigence, and the exile readily admits that he suffers
most from the impossibility of communicating in his language. The root is monolingual. For the troubadour and for
Rimbaud errantry is a vocation only toid via detour. The call
of Relation is heard, but it is not yet a fully present experience.
However, and this is an immense paradox, the great founding books of communities, the Old Testament, the Iliad, the
Odyssey, the Chansons de Geste, the Islandic Sagas, the Aeneid,
or the Mrican epics, were aIl books about exile and often
about errantry. This epic literature is amazingly prophetic. It
tells of the community, but, through relating the community's apparent failure or in any case its being surpassed, it
tells of errantry as a ternptation (the desire to go against the
root) and, frequently, actually experienced. Within the collective books concerning the sacred and the notion of history
lies the germ of the exact opposite ofwhat they so Ioudly prodaim. When the very idea of territory becomes relative,
nuances appear in the legitirnacy of territorial possession.
These are books about the birth of collective consciousness,
but they also introduce the unrest and suspense that allow
the individual to discover himself there, whenever he himself
becomes the issue. The Greek victory in the Iliad depends on
trickery; Ulysses returns from his Odyssey and is recognized
only by his dog; the Old Testarnent David bears the stain of
adultery and murder; the Chanson de Roland is the chronide
of a defeat; the characters in the Sagas are branded by an
unstemmable fate, and so forth. These books are the begin-
15ning of something entirely different fi'om massive, dogmatic,
and totalitarian certainty (despite the religious uses to which
they will be put). These are books of errantry, going beyond
the pursuits and triumphs of rootedness required by the evolution of history.
Sorne of these books are devoted entirely to the supreme
errantry, as in the Egyptian Book of the Dead. The very book
whose function is to consecrate an intransigent conununity is
alreadya compromise, qualifying its triumph with revelatory
wanderings.*
In both L'Intention jJoétique (Poetic Intention) and Le DisCOUT'i
antillais (Caribbean Discourse)-of which the present work is a
reconstituted echo or a spiral retelling-I approached this
dimension of epic literature. 1began wondering ifwe did not
still need such fuunding works today, ones that would use a
similar dialectics of rerouting,4 asserting, for example, political strength but, simultaneously, the rhizome of a multiple
relationship with the Other and basing every community's
reasons for existence on a modern form of the sacred, which
would be, a11 in aH, a Poetics of Relation.**
This movement, therefore (one among others, equally
important, in other parts of the world), has led from a primordial nomadism to the settled way of life of vVestern
nations then to Discovery and Conquest, which achieved a
final, almost mystical perfection in the Voyage.
In the course of this journey identity, at least as far as the
Western peoples who made up the great m~jority ofvoyagers,
discoverers, and conquerors were concerned, consolidates
*Hegel, in book 3 of his Aesthetin, shows hmv the founding works of
communities appear spontaneously at the moment in which a still naive
collective eonsciousness reassures itself about its own legitimacy, or, not
to mince words: about its right tn possess a land. In tllis sense Epic
thought is close to that of Myth.
**The necessary surpassing of mythic and epic thought took place in
the political reason organizing the City. Epie expression is obscure and
unfathomablc, one of the conditions of naiveté. Political discourse is
obviotls. Surpassing can be contradiction.
16itself implicitly at first ("my root is the strongest") and then is
explicitly exported as a value ("a person's worth is determined by his root"). * The conquered or visited peoples are
thus forced into a long and painful quest after an identity
whose first task will be opposition to the denaturing process
introduced by the conqueror. A tragic variation of a sear'ch
for identity. For more than two centuries whole populations
have had to assert their identity in opposition to the
processes of identification br annihilation triggered by these
invaders. Whereas the Western nation is first of aIl an "opposite,"** for colonized peoples identity will be primarily
"opposed to"-that is, a lirnitation from the beginning.
Decolonization will have done its real work when it goes
beyond this limit.
The duality of self-perception (one is citizen or foreigner)
has repercussions on one's idea of the Other (one is visitor or
visited; one goes or stays; one conquers or is conquered).
Thought of the Other cannot escape its own dualism until
the time when differences become acknowledged. From that
point on thought of the Other "comprehends"5 multiplicity,
but mechanically and still taking the subtle hierarchies of a
generalizing universal as its basis. Acknowledging differences
does not compel one to be involved in the dialectics of their
totality. One could get away with: "I can acknowledge your
difference and continue to think it is harmful to you. I can
think that my strength lies in the Voyage (I am making History) and that your difference is motionless and silent."
Another step remains to be taken before one really enters the
dialectic of totality. And, contrary to the mechanics of the
Voyage, this dialectic turns out to be driven by the thought of
errantry.
*That is, as we have said, essentially by his language.
**If the idea of civilization holds opposites together, a generalizing universaI will be the principle of their action in the world, the principle
that will allow them to realize conflicts of interest in a finalist conception of History. The first colonist, Christopher Columbus, did not voyage in the name of a country but of an idea.
17Let us suppose that the quest for totality, starting from a
nonuniversal context of histories of the West, has passed
through the füllowing stages:
-the thinking of territory and self (ontological, dual)
-the thinking of voyage and other (mechanical,
multiple)
-the thinking of errantry and totality (relational,
dialectical) .
We will agree that this thinking of errantry, this errant
thought, silently emerges from the destructuring of compact
national entities that yesterday were still triumphant and, at
the same time, from difficult, uncertain births of new forms
of identity that calI to us.
In this context uprooting can work toward identity, and exile
can be seen as beneficial, when these are experienced as a
search for the Other (through circular nomadism) rather
than as an expansion of territory (an arrowlike nomadism).
Totality's imaginary alIows the detours that leacl away fi'om
anything totalitarian.
Errantry, therefore, does not proceed from renunciation nor
from frustration regarding a supposedly deteriorated (deterritorialized) situation of origin; it is not a resolute act of rejection or an uncontrolled impulse of abandonment. Sometimes, by taking up the pl'oblems of the Other, it is possible to
find oneself. Contemporary history provides several striking
examples of this, among them Frantz Fanon, whose path led
from Martinique to Algeria. That is very much the image of
the rhizome, prompting the knowledge that identity is no
longer completely within the root but also in Relation.
Because the thought oferrantry is also the thought ofwhat is
relative, the thing relayed as weIl as the thing relatecl. The
thought of errantr)' is a poetics, which always infers that at
some mOlnent it is told. The tale of errantry is the tale of
Relation.
18In contrast to arrowlike nomadism (discovery or conquest),
in contrast to the situation of exile, errantry gives-on-andwith the negation of every pole and every metropolis,
whether connected or not to a conqueror's voyaging act. We
have repeatedly rnentioned that the first thing exported by
the conqueror was his language. Moreover, the great Western
languages were supposedly vehicular languages, which often
took the place of an actual metropolis. Relation, in contrast,
is spoken multilingually. Coing beyond the impositions of
economic forces and cultural pressures, Relation rightfully
opposes the totalitarianism of any monolingual intent.
At this point we seem to be far removed from the sufferings
and preoccupations ofthose who must bear the world's injustice. Their errantry is, in effect, immobile. They have never
experienced the melancholy and extroverted luxury of
uprooting. They do not travel. But one of the constants of
our world is that a knowledge of roots will be conveyed to
them from within intuitions of Relation from now on. Traveling is no longer the locus of power but, rather, a pleasurable,
if privileged, time. The ontological obsession with knowledge
gives way here to the enjoyment of a relation; in its elementary and often caricatural form this is tourism. Those who
stay behind thrill to this passion for the world shared by aIl.
Or, indeed, they may suffer the torments of internaI exile.
I would not describe the physicaI situation of those who
suffer the oppression of an Other within their own country,
such as the blacks in South Mrica, as internaI exile. Because
the solution here is visible and the outcome determined;
force alone can oppose this. InternaI exile strikes individuals
living where solutions concerning the relationship of a cornmunity to its surroundings are not, or at least not yet, consented to by this community as a whole. These solutions, precariously outlined as decisions, are still the prerogative of
only a few, who, as a result, are lTlarginalized. InternaI exile is
the voyage out of this enclosure. It is a motionless and exac-
19erbated introduction to the thought of errantry. Most often it
is diverted into partial, pleasurable compensations in which
the individual is consumed. InternaI exile tends toward material comfôrt, which cannot l'eaUy distract fi"om anguish.
Whereas exile may erode one's sense of identity, the thought
of errantry-the thought of that which relates-usually reinforces this sense of identity. lt seems possible, at least to one
observer, that the persecuted errantry, the wandering of the
Jews, may have reinforced their sense of identity far more
than their present settling in the land of Palestine. Being
cxilcdJews turned into a vocation of errantI'y, their point of
reference an ideal land whose power may, in fact, have been
undermined by concrete land (a territory), chosen and conquered. This, however, is mere conjecture. Because, while
one can communicate through errantry's imaginary vision,
the experiences of exiles are incommunicable.
The thought of errantry is not apoliticai nor is it inconsistent
with the will to identity, which is, after aIl, nothing other than
the search for a freedom within particular surroundings. If it
is at variance with territorial intolerance, or the predatory
effects of the unique l'Qot (which makes processes of
identification so difficult today), this is because, in the poetics of Relation, one who is errant (who is no longer traveler,
discoverer, or conqueror) strives to know the totality of the
world yet already knows he will never accomplish this-and
knows that is precisely where the threatened beauty of the
world resides.
Errant, he challenges and discards the universal-this generalizing edict that summarized the world as something obvious and transparent, claiming for it one presupposed sense
and one destiny. He plunges into the opacities ofthat part of
the worId to \vhich he has access. Generalization is totalitarian: from the world it chooses one side of the reports, one set
of ideas, which it sets apart from others and tries to impose by
20exporting as a model. The thinking of errantry conceives of
totality but willingly renounces any claims to sum it up or to
possess it.
The founding books have taught us that the sacred dimension consists always of going deeper into the mystery of the
root, shaded with variations of errantry. In reality errant
thinking is the postulation of an unyielding and unfading
sacred. We remember that Plato, who understood the power
of Myth, had hoped to banish the poets, those who force
obscurity, far from the Republic. He distrusted the fathomless word. Are we not returning here, in the unforeseeable
meanders of Relation, to this abyssal word? Nowhere is it
stated that now, in this thought of errantry, humanity will not
succeed in transmuting Myth's opacities (which were formerly the occasion for setting roots) and the diffracted
insights of political philosophy, thereby reconciling Homer
and Plato, Hegel and the Mrican griot.
But we need to figure out whether or not there are other
succulencies of Relation in other parts of the world (and
already at work in an underground manner) that will suddenly open up other avenues and soon help to correct whatever simplifying, ethnocentric exclusions may have arisen
from such a perspective.
*
As far as literature is concerned (without my having to establish a pantheon, an isolation these works would refuse), there
are two contemporary bodies of work, it seems to me, in
which errantry and Relation are at play.
Faulkner's work, somehow theological. This wntlng is
about digging up roots in the South-an obvious place to do
so in the United States. But the root begins to act like a rhizome; there is no basis for certainty; the relation is tragic.
Because of this dispute over source, the sacred-but henceforth unspeakable-enigma of the root's location, Faulkner's
21world represents one of the thrilling moments in the modern
poe tics of Relation. At one time 1 regretted that such a world
had not gone farther, spreading its vision into the Caribbean
and Latin America. But, perhaps, this was a reaction of
unconscious frustration on the part of one who felt excluded.
And Saint:John Perse's erratic work, in search of that
which moves, of that which goes-in the absolute sense. 6 A
work leading to totality-·to the out-and-out exaltation of a
universal that becomes exhausted from being said too much.
22Poetics
In the nineteenth century, after the Spanish language had
expanded into South America and the Portuguese language
into Brazil, the French and English languages successfully
accompanied the widespread expansion of their own respective cultures around the world. Other Western languages,
German, Italian, or Russian, for example, despite sorne limited attempts at colonization, were not driven by this propensity for self-exportation that nearly always generates a sort of
vocation for the universal. As for non-Western languages,
Quechua, Swahili, Hindi, or Chinese, they remain endogenous and nonproliferating; their poetics do not yet hint at
involvement in the evolution ofworld histories.
Our aim here is to advance the notion that, within the limited framework of one language-French-competing to discover the world and dominate it, literary production is partly
determined by this discovery, which also transforrns numerous aspects of its poetics; but that there persists, at least as far
as French is concerned, a stubborn resistance to anyatternpt
at clarifying the matter. Everythingjust goes along as if, at the
moment it entered into the poetics of worldwide Relation,
ready to replace the former hegemony, collective thought
working within the language chose to cover up its expressive
relationship with the other, rather than admit any participation that would not be one of preeminence.
With generally good results literary theoreticians have
been content to define the poetics deemed responsible for
23the entrance of French Iiterature into modernity beginning
in the nineteenth century. A theory of depth, a practice of
language-in-itself, and the problematics of textuaI structure
were thus formulated. (1 simplifY for effect, to critical
extremes.) They have pretended to forget that, in literature,
just like everywhere else in the world, one of the full-senses 1
of modernity is provided henceforth by the action of human
cultures' identifying one another for their mutual transformation.
Poetics of depth. Baudelaire explorecl the early realms of
this forrn of poetics. The vertiginous extension, not out into
the world but toward the abysses man carries within himself.
Western man essentially, that is, who at that moment in time
governed the evolution of modernity and provided its
rhythm. Inner space is as infinitely explorable as spaces of
the earth. At the same time as he discovered the nurnerous
varieties of the species man constituted, he felt that the
alleged stability of knowledge led nowhere and that aIl he
would ever know of himself was what he made others know.
As a result, Baudelaire quashed roman tic lyricism's claim
that the poet was the introspective master of his joys or so1'-
rows; and that it was in his power to draw clear, plain lessons
from this that would benefit everyone. This romantic beatitude was swept away by the stenches inseparable from
Baudelairean carrion.
Poetics of depth-like depth psychology-does not, however, renounce its certainty that there is a universal model, a
sort of archetype of humanity, difficult to circumscribe or
define, of course, but one that would simultaneously ensure
our knowledge in the matter and be its ultimate aim. These
both tended, on the other hand, to displace the terrain of
this knowledge: first dispossessing it of the sovereign subject
(requiring the knowledge-the gaze, or the hearing-of
another) then surrendering it to this suqject (speaking "in"
the structures of any expressed knowledge).
24A poetics of language-in-itself. It sanctions the moment when
language, as if satisfied with its perfection, ceases to take for
its object the recounting of its connection with particular surroundings, to concentrate solely upon its fervor to exceed its
limits and reveal thoroughly the elements composing itsolely upon its engineering skill with these. This practice does
not proceed without rambling, because rambling-as Mallarmé weIl knew-is an absolute challenge to narrative.
Rather than discovering or telling about the world, it is a matter of producing an equivalent, which would be the Book, in
which everything would be said, without anything's being
reported.* Mallarmé, who experienced, of course, the temptations of elsewhere, spent his energy solely on producing this
totality of language. The world as book, the Book as world.
His heroism within confinement is a way of celebrating a
desired, dreamt-of totality within the absolute of the word.
The poetics of language-in-itself strives toward a knowledge that by definition would only be exercised within the
limits of a giyen language. It would renounce (Mallarmé
notwithstanding, with his anxious pleasure in being professor and translator of English) the nostalgia for other languages-for the infinite possible languages-now germinating in every literature.
A poetics of structure. The creator of a text is effaced, or,
rather, is done away with, to be revealed in the texture of his
creation. Just as narrative had been eliminated from Mallarméan poetics, History (in the sense given by the West to this
word) must be considered in context, according to the structuralists. Ernphasizing one more renunciation, a subtle one,
of the world as it produces itself, that is, as it rightfully
escapes the control of Western discoverers: explorers, merchants, conquerors, ethnologists-those men of intelligence,
faith, and law.
*My intent in Caribbean Discoursewas to question this equivalence.
25The neutral rather than harsh actuality of the object; the
tightening of a locus; the low regard for anl' thought claiming falsely to be final; the literaI and the flat-these are a few
of the factors linked with the works of numerous contemporary French authors that provide access to them within the
context of this poetics.
Those involved with the exegesis of French literature since
romanticism have looked to poetics of depth, science of language, and textual disclosure, in turn, for the authority to
outline its problematics. But there is l'et another-unnoticed, or rather evaded-that we shaH caH a poetics of Relation.
The cultures of the wodd have alwal's main tained relations
among themselves that were close or active to varying
degrees, but it is only in modern tiInes that some of the right
conditions came together to speed up the nature of these
connections.
The vague feeling that the end of the wodd had been
reached, in the geographical sense, removed whatever element of adventure and perhaps blind belief there had been
in the discovery of the other. Since the beginning of this century the shrinking of unexplored regions on the map of the
worId has made minds less infatuated with adventure, or less
sensitive to its beauty, inc1ining more toward a concern for
the truth of human beings. Understanding cultures then
became more gratifying than discovering new lands. Western
ethnography was structured on the basis of this need. But we
shaH perhaps see that the verb to understand in the sense of
"to grasp" [cornpTendn!] has a fearsome repressive meaning
here.
Contacts among cultures-one of the givens of modernity-will no longer come across the huge spans of time that
have historically allowed meetings and interchanges to be
active but almost imperceptibly so. Whatever happens elsewhere has immediate repercussions here. Not long ago cul-
26tural influences were initially of a general nature, affecting
communities progressively; today the individual, without having to go anywhere, can be directly touched by things elsewhere, sometirnes even before his community, farnily, social
group, or nation has been enriched by the same effect. This
imrnediate and fragmentary repercussion on individuals, as
individuals, permitted the premonitions of Victor Segalen or
Raymond Roussel or the Douanier Rousseau-the first poets
of Relation.
Finally-the third condition-the consciousness of Relation became widespread, including both the collective and
the individual. We "know" that the Other is within us and
affects how we evolve as weIl as the bulk of our conceptions
and the development of our sensibility. Rimbaud's "1 is an
other" is literaI in terms of history. In spite of ourselves, a sort
of "consciousness of consciousness" opens us up and turns
each of us inta a disconcerted actor in the poetics of Relation.
Starting from the moment that cultures, lands, men, and
women were no longer there to discover but to know, Relation represented an absolute (that is, a totality finally
sufficient to itself) that, paradoxically, set us free from the
absolute's intolerances.
To the extent that our consciousness of Relation is total,
that is, immediate and focusing directly upon the realizable
totality of the world, when we speak of a poetics of Relation,
we no longer need to add: relation between what and what?
This is why the French word Relation, which functions somewhat like an intransitive verb, could not correspond, for
example, to the English term relationship.
We have aIready said that Relation inforrns not sirnply what is
relayed but also the relative and the related. Its always
approximate truth is given in a narrative. For, though the
world is not a book, it is nonetheless true that the silence of
the world would, in turn, make us deaf. Relation, driving
27humanities chaotically onward, needs words to publish itseif,
to continue. But because what it relates, in reality, proceeds
from no absolute, it proves to be the totality of relatives, put
in touch and told.
It is not merely a pleasant option to consider this "movement" within the context of French literature. Quite simply,
two conditions have come together here: a culture that projected onto the world (with the aim of dominating it) and a
language that was presented as universal (with the aim of
providing legitimacy to the attempt at domination). These
two intentions, not without sorne acknowledged portion of
largesse, culminated in the thought of an empire.* Under
these conditions poetic thought went on the alert: beneath
the fantasy of domination it sought the l'eally livable world.
It projected toward. A5 if it set out aIl over again on the trajectory of an earlier arrowlike nomadism. Moreover, the
movements of this poetics can be located in space as tr~ectories, their poetic import being aimed at completing these trajectories in order to abolish them. These trajectories link the
places of the world into a whole rnade up of peripheries,
which are listed in function of a Center. **
The first of these tr~jectories led from the Center toward
*The empire is the absolute manifestation of totality. The thought of
empire is selective: what it brings to the universal is not the quantity of
totality that has becn realized but a quality that it represents as the
Whole. The empire thus usually attempts to forestall conflicts throughout ilS territory. But impcrial pcacc is the true dcath of Relation.
**1 outlined this route in L'intention poPtiqup: "From the One to the Universe-From the diverse to the common-The we of the other-The
other of us." ln Ln lézarde, to evaluate our alienations, 1 mentioncd the
perspective of a Center for the first tÎmc.
M. Samir Amin developed a global theory of worldwide economy,
articulated in Centers (to produce and control) and Peripheries (to
receive). He conc1uded that it \vas necessary tür these peripheries to
have a self-centered economy, proceeding from a will fur "deconnection" in relation to the global system.
28the peripheries. 1 take the work of Victor Segalen as an innovative example of this; but is it necessary to mention aIl those
who, whether critical or possessed, racist or idealist, frenzied
or rational, have experienced passionately the calI of Diversity since his time: frorrl Cendrars to Malraux, trom Michaux
to Artaud, from Gobineau to Céline, from Claudel to Michel
Leiris?
A second itinerary then began to form, this time from
peripheries toward the Center. Poets who were born or lived
in the elsewhere dream of the source of their imaginary constructs and, consciously or not, "make the trip in the opposite
direction," struggling to do so. Jules Supervielle. Saintjohn
Perse. Georges Schéhadé.
In a third stage the trajectory is abolished; the arrowlike
projection becornes curved. The poet's word leads frorrl
periphery to periphery, and, yes, it reproduces the track of
circular nomadism; that is, it makes every periphery into a
center; furthermore, it abolishes the very notion of center
and periphery. AlI of this germinated in the works of writers
such as Segalen, Kateb Yacine, Cheik Anta Diop, Léon
Gontran Damas, and many others it would be impossible to
name.
The time came, then, in which Relation was no longer a
prophecy rrlade by a series of trajectories, itineraries that fol-·
lowed or thwarted one another. By itself and in itself Relation
exploded like a network inscribed within the sufficient totality of the world.
Segalen's crucial idea was that encountering the Other
superactivates poetic imagination and understanding. Of
course, from that moment on there could be no question of
hierarchy in pursuit of relations with the other. Let me point
out, however, that Segalen does not merely describe recognition of the other as a moral obligation (which would be a
banality) but he considers it an aesthetic constituent, the first
edict of a real poetics of Relation. The power to experience
29the shock of elsewhere is what distinguishes the poet. Diversity, the quantifiable totality of every possible difference, is
the motar driving universal energy, and it must be safeguarded from assimilations, from fashions passively accepted
as the norm, and from standardized customs.
Segalen wrote novels that are at the same time ethnological studies, declarations, and defenses; he struggled to
explain the thought processes of Gauguin (in this instance
his double); he projected also the main lines of a theoretical
essay on exoticism, considered as an experience of something new and unique and not a silly delight in novelty. And,
just as Mallarmé was unable to see his Book through to the
end, Segalen did not complete this basic work, though its
main points were fortunately preserved. The theory of the
poem is resistant to expression.
ln A",ia, another land of conjuriction and permanence,
alongside the building crises, these three poets (among others)-Segalen, Claudel, and Saint:John Perse-·either met or
succeeded one another. An important part of their work is
played out there. But Saint-John Perse and Segalen took the
road in opposite directions. Saint-John Perse began by fixing
in memory, in what would be Éloges) the scenery of his native
island, Guadeloupe. However, his real vocation was getting
away, no matter how it made him suffer. Segalen, on the
other hand, went toward the other, ran to elsewhere. SaintJohn Perse, born in this elsewhere, returned to the Sametoward the Center. He proclaimed the universality of the
French language and declared this language his country. The
poems that followed attempted, to the very end, to erect the
murmuring cathedrals of this chosen universal.*
Similarly, in Georges Schéhadé's poetry: the quarrying of
place, the fantastic fantasy that unleashes all known geography, prophetically give an account-many years before the
event-of the dramatic breakup of Lebanon, the place of
Relation. Expressed there again, in the ethereal suspension
*Thc rooted errantry of this poet is discussed elsewhere"
30of language, is a renunciation of the earth: a disorientation
of words-which end up joining with the only available
authority, the poetic grace of the French language.
This sort of effort, in which pathos contributes to genius,
had its forerunners in far less convincing attempts to return
and, frankly, be reintegrated through the language: the Parnassians, Leconte de Lisle, and José Maria de Heredia are
examples. Without counting the immeasurable adventure,
entirely on the Ievel of the absolute, of another poet from
elsewhere, who, like Saint:John Perse, wanted to "inhabit his
name," making language his country: Lautréamont.
This thought of the Same and the Other2 thus put poets at
risk but became hopelessly banal as soon as emerging populations made its formulation obsolete. Converging histories
have also joined forces with this contingent of the world's literatures, bringing to life new forms of expression "within"
the same language. Poets from the Caribbean, the Maghreb,
and other parts of Africa are not moving toward that elsewhere that is the airn of projectile movement, nor are they
returning toward a Center. They create their works in metropolitan regions, where their peoples have made a sudden
appearance. The old expansive trajectory and the spirituality
of the itinerary (always frorn Paris toJerusalem or elsewhere)
yield to the world's realized compactness. We have to enter
into the equivalencies of Relation.
My excuse for accumulating so many commonplaces about
these tendencies so readily discernible in literature written in
French is that amassing commonplaces is, perhaps, the right
approach to my real subject-the entanglements of worldwide relation-and that almost everything that has been said
about these tendencies, concerning the poetics of Relation,
has been done so in a manner that is fragmentary, reticent,
and stubbornly blind.
Because, as l have already emphasized, these trajectories
(from the European here to elsewhere) end up abolishing
what yesterday originally occasioned their being: the linear
31prqjection of a sensibility toward the world's horizons, the
vectorization of this world into metropolises and colonies.
Theoretician thought is loath to sanction this abolitionthereby shutting dmvn its bastions. lt tries to be clever with
the thrust of the '\Torld and sidesteps it. It thinks up screens
for itself.
In addition, the poetics of Relation remains fürever conjectural and presupposes no ideological stability. It is against
the comfortable assurances linked ta the supposed excellence of a language. A poetics that is latent, open, multilinguaI in intention, directly in contact with everything possible.
Theoretician thought, focused on the basic and fundamental, and allying these with what is true, shies away from these
uncertain paths.
Poetry's circulation and its action no longer conjecture a
given people but the evalution of the planet Earth. That too
is a commonplace, one worth repeatirig. We have to know
that this activity pinpointed here in French literatures operates for a1l the others, each time on the basis of a different
perspective. Every expression of the humanities opens onto
the fluctuating complexity of the world. Here poetic thought
safeguards the particular, since only the totality of truly
secure particulars guarantees the energy of Diversity. But in
every instance this particular sets about Relation in a completely intransitive manner, relating, that is, with the finally
realized totality of al1 possible particulars.
When we say that, henceforth, this poetics of Relation
interweaves and no longer projects, that it inscribes itself in a
circularity, we are not referring to a circuit, a line of energy
curved back onto itself. Trajectory, even bent or inflected, no
longer applies. How many different problematics, secreted in
how many other regions of the world, and under how many
different auspices, have come to encounter the problematic
we raise here, organizing the rounds of the Earth totality?
And then, in a circularity with volume, we imagine the discloseable aesthetics of a Chaos, with every least detail as com-
32pIex as the whole that cannot be reduced, simplified, or normalized. Each of its parts patterns activity implicated in the
activity of every other. The history of peoples has led to this
dynamic. They need not stop running on their own rnomentum to join in this movernent, since they are inscribed in it
already. They cannot, however, "give-on-and-with" until they
reach the point at which they go beyond assenting to their
linear drive alone and consent to global dynamics-practicing a self-break and a reconnection.
We no longer reveal totality within ourselves by lightning
flashes. We approach it through the accumulation of sediments. The poetics of duration (another leitmotiv), one of
the first principles of the sacred, founding books of community, reappears to take up the relay from the poetics of the
mornent. Lightning flashes are the shivers of one who desires
or dreams of a totality that is impossible or yet to come; duration urges on those who attempt to live this totality, when
dawn shows through the linked histories of peoples.
Sedirnent then begins first with the country in which your
drama takes shape. Just as Relation is not a pure abstraction
to replace the old concept of the universal, it also neither
implies nor authorizes any ecumenical detachment. The
landscape ofyour word is the world's landscape. But its frontier is open.
The Caribbean, as far as 1 am concerned, rnay be held up
as one of the places in the world where Relation presents
itself rnost visibly, one of the explosive regions where it seems
to be gathering strength.
This has always been a place of encounter and connivance
and, at the same time, a passageway toward the Arnerican
continent. Compared to the Mediterranean, which is an
inner sea surrounded by lands, a sea that concentrates (in
Greek, Hebrew, and Latin antiquity and later in the ernergence of lslarn, imposing the thought of the One), the
Caribbean is, in contrast, a sea that explodes the scattered
lands into an arc. A sea that diffracts. Without necessarily
33inferring any advantage whatsoever to their situation, the
reality of archipelagos in the Caribbean or the Pacific pro"
vides a natural illustration of the thought of Relation.
What took place in the Caribbean, which could be
summed up in the word creolization, approximates the idea of
Relation for us as nearly as possible. It is not merely an
encounter, a shock (in Segalen's sense), a métissage/' but a
new and original dimension allowing each person to be there
and elsewhere, rooted and open, lost in the mountains and
free beneath the sea, in harmony and in errantry.
If we posit métissage as, generally speaking, the meeting
and synthesis of two differences, creolization seems to be a
limitless métissage, it,; elements diffracted and its consequences unforeseeable. Creolization diffracts, whereas certain forms of métissage can concentrate one more time. Here
it is devoted ta what has burst forth from lands that are no
longer islands. Its most obvious symbol is in the Creole language, whose genius consists in always being open, that is,
perhaps, never becoming fixed except according ta systems
of variables that we have to imagine as much as define. Creolization carries along then into the adventure of multilingualism and into the incredible explosion of cultures. But
the explosion of cultures does not mean they are scattered or
mutually diluted. It is the violent sign oftheir consentual, not
imposed, sharing. 4
The same holds true, in many different ways, throughout the
Arrlericas. 1 cannot help thinking that these itineraries 1 have
described for literature written in French have long been
traveled by the literature of the United States in its links with
its common rootstock, the English language. From the
periphery to the Center with Henry James; in a total poetics
of Relation with Walt Whitman; in the affirmation of differences with black Arrlerican poets; in the structuring of supposed periphery as the Center, from the particular to a nongeneralizing universal, with William Faulkner ("failed poet"),
whose work practically never went beyond the limits of that
34"postage stamp" ofYoknapatawpha County, the literary double of Oxford, Mississippi, where he chose to live.
And at stake once again in Brazilian and Hispano-Arnerican literatures: the explosion of baroque expression, the
whorls of time, the Iningling of centuries and jungles, the
saIne epic voice retying into the weft of the world, beyond any
iInposed solitude, exaction, or oppression.
Thus what -for Segalen and so many others-was the wish
of the poet discovering the world is now, for everyone, the
work of the poet sharing in the life of the world.
Throughout this book 1return again and again to what 1 have
so long considered the main themes of such a poetics: the
dialectics between the oral and the written, the thought of
multilingualism, the balance between the present moment
and duration, the questioning ofliterary genres, the power of
the baroque, the nonprojectile imaginary construct.5 But
even this constant repetition is sufficient evidence that such a
poetics never culminates in sorne qualitative absolute. For, in
reality, Relation is not an absolute toward which every work
would strive but a totality-even if for us this means disentangling it, something it never required-that through its
poetic and practical and unceasing force attempts to be perfected, to be spoken, simply, that is, to be complete.
35A Rooted Errantry
For Saint-John Perse universality is optative. Not that it was
predicated by him in a desolate mood (like someone who
takes refuge in the thought of the universal, because he considers no specifie situation his responsibility), but because,
steadfastly and without pause, he projects it before himself.
Saint:John Perse, indeed, left the spot tmNard which so many
French poets who were his contemporaries projected themselves-the elsewhere full of diversity-which somehow
always ends up contributing to the glorification of a sovereign Here.
The Here for him: "my bitch ofEurope, who was white and
poet more than 1." Understand that it was not where he
uttered his first cry (Guadeloupe) that Saint:John Perse
engendered his poetics but in the places ofits distant origins,
its ideal provenance. Poetry has its source in an idea, in a
desire, not in the literaI fact ofbirth.
His elsewhere, by contrast: an island, above aIl a conjectural place, where apparently even the poet's birth already
marked a margin. His elsewhere was not like Segalen 's, colored by a dream to be approached, a temptation to be
satisfied. It was given in childhood, already the evidence of
every possible elsewhere.
To consecrate the union between elsewhere and possibility, the poet demanded of himself permanent abstinence
from something impossible for him: the house of his birth in
the Antilles but also, and as if attributable to this first absti-
37nence, he kept a resolute distance from any Here conferred
in advance (not willfully meditated).
Saint:John Perse's stern errantry sets its course ,,\ragering
on a Here (Europe) toward which one must choose to return
and an elsewhere (the Antilles) from which one leaves. He
could not have tolerated playing colonial in the universe, as r
long thought he had, nor being its vagabond, as Rimbaud
attempted. He heightens the universal within himself, forging it from things impossible. These are the very reasons his
universality has nothing to do with exoticism, severely criticizing it, instead, and serving as its natural negation.
The poetics thus set in play must be addressed. On a crude
and elementary level ofanalysis one might emphasize its contradiction: Saint:John Perse, descendant of the class of coloniallandholders, liked to think of himself as a Frenchman of
noble stock; nurtured by the orality of Creole, he made the
choice to establish himselfin the purest of French styles. One
could push this further, imagining the wounds there beneath
the formaI, lacquered surface, a drama that both cancels out
and elevates itselfinto arrogant rigidity. But let's not. The lesson of the poet goes much deeper. It leaves behind the ordinary regions laid out in biography.
Saint:John Perse renounces any sort of "grasp" of the history of the place he was born and projects, into an eternally
given future, the Ail he takes for his grounding. The commonplace ofsuch a future is the name, his name as poet, one
deliberately forged: a word. "1 shall inhabit ml' name."
With these words he announces not the obsolescence of
narrative but a new and original aesthetic form: the narration of the universe. This is why his writing takes on added
strength from his considerable efforts as an entomologist,
cartographer, or lexicographer. The rigors of material and
his encyclopedic knowledge weave a controlled proliferation through which the universe overflows and recounts
itself for us.
38Clearly, one of the places engraved in Antillean memory is
the circle drawn around the storyteller by the shadows of
night. On the borders of this ring the children who will relay
the word are beside themselves. Their bodies are hot with the
fever of day; their eyes grow larger in this time that does not
go by. These children understand nothing of the formulas,
nor do they catch the allusions, but the man with the stories
speaks to them first. He is quick to guess when they will
shiver, wide rnouthed in terror, or laugh to coyer up their
fear. His voice cornes frorn beyond the seas, charged with the
movement of those Mrican countries present in their
absence; it lingers in the night, which draws the trembling
children into its womb.
It astonishes me to hear people sometimes try to reduce
Saint:John Perse's orality to that of declamation. Yet it could
never be produced onstage. Too many broad zones of obviousness stretch out within it, blocked here and there by root
stumps, when language thickens into nodules. When the
obvious is declaimed, it immediately becomes a tautological
transparency. Believing that this poet's text can fill or define
the stage of a theater is a mistake too often made. His sort of
orality does not lead to things of a public nature; it is the
equivalent of (alternative to) modesty. Underneath, the
inner voice weaves its redundant repetitions. This is an orality that is not spoken aloud but articulated in underground
understandings.
The lack of any circle summing up the night around him
is the first distinction between Saint:John Perse and the Antillean storyteller. There are no torches surrounding his words;
there is only a hand stretched toward the horizon that rises
up as ocean swells or high plateaus. It is the always possible
infinite. The ring made by the voice is diffracted into the
world. The orality of Saint:John Perse is not wrapped by
rustling shadows suggestive of the surroundings; it greets
dawns, when faraway echoes are already mingling with familial' sounds, when the caravan makes its departure from the
undying desert.
39Saint-john Perse does not piece back together the torn
memory of one place, where another lost place still lies concealed or is finally revealed. The Antillean story, diverting the
traces it maintains of an original Afl-ica, laces the swells of this
previous country into echoes and, refusing the inertia of
transparent words, makes us think of the real world, this
wodd he writes about. But this poet, likewise, who begins by
"celebrating a childhood," refuses the comforts of an album
to be -leated through. vVhat, in fact, is this always vanishing
memory? '''That is this place (this house) the one they say we
come from? And this princely solitude in the midst of "al1
things" dazzling, exploded, and permanently bright? The
work of Saint-John Perse aims at pushing memory (ofa place,
of people, of the things seen in childhood) far forward. This
orality does Ilot invite listeners to the shadow's edge; it throws
each one of us into the resolution of one to come. Éloges is
not a tormented memory that is repeated in shadows but the
suspense heralding solemn departures. The poet knows that
he has absolutely lost the thing he always remembers, the
thing he leaves behind.
In the works of Saint:John Perse there exist simultaneously
a totalization one might caIl baroque and a revolution in the
technique of the plainsong. They work together. But 1 arn
confident that this i5 a "naturalized" baroque; that is, it has
nothing to do with any reference and would be opposed ta it.
Rerouting [détou.rnement] is its only norm, or its fundamental
nature. And plainsong here, ordinarily an occasion for transport or escape, holds us clearly in the world at its fuUest.
Thus, it is around interactions of memory and place that
things irreconcilable for both poet and storyteller are perpetrated. The Antillean locus appears to Saint-John Perse with a
dazzling clarity that 1 would mistrust. Isn't the memory for
detail (this poetics of diffracted moments) employed here in
order to ward off something else: the temptation of something stirring for so long in the background of the Caribbean
landscape? It is at this moment in the work that the explosion
of the instant obliterates duration, which will later be recov-
40ered but under the auspices ofuniversality. In contrast, in the
orality of the Antillean story the drive of this duration (of this
collective memory-of this "history"-whose energy must be
made wholeheartedly dear) cancels out the detail of the
place. Obsession with a possible duration douds the explosive dazzle of the present.
For Saint:fohn Perse, however, as for the man who tells the
tales, the same avenue awaits. In the poem's harsh transcendence, as in the cunning organization of the story, there are
ruptures and densities of orality that calI up these impossible
things: for the latter the place where he remains and for the
former the world where he goes.
Dweller and pilgrim live this same exile.
*
Departure and errantry in Saint:John Perse are to be interpreted as a rejection of the histories of peoples but their
magnificence as an assuming of History, in the Hegelian
sense. This errantry is not rhizomatic but deeply rooted: in a
will and an Idea. History or its negation, the intuition of the
One, these are the magnetic poles of Western thought at
which Saint:John Perse grounded his name. He thought that
the condition of freedom is that the individual not be ruled
by a history, except one that generalizes, nor limited by a
place, unless that place is spiritual. Because the universal has
this heroic dimension, we are able to recognize ourselves in
his work, even though we challenge its generalizing models.
It may also be possible that this passion driving the work
(because it is foreign to a space and a time-the Antillean
history and place-that are so problematic for it and because
it is rooted in such absolute errantry) is reassuring to us
regarding the contradictions we experience here and now.
For the poetry of Saint:John Perse, though it is not the
epic linking together of lessons from a past, augurs a new
rnode of connection with the Other, which, paradoxically,
41and precisely because of this passion for errantry, prophesies
the poetics of Relation. By constantly moving on, one can
gather stones and weave the materiality of the universe from
which Saint-John Perse created his narrative. This is how, in
the end, he met with Victor Segalen, about whom he said littIe, doubtless because in the same sumptuous manner, but in
opposite directions, their itineraries parted.
*
Unaware of us, he precedes us on this road through the
world. When we catch up with him, we find him still and
always drawing for us figures of our solitudes to sharethough these are figures frozen in his noble renunciation.
42II
ELEMENTS
The elementary reconstitutes itselfabsolutelyREPETITIONS
~~
This flood ofconvergences, publishing itseif in the guise of the
commonPlace. No longer is the latter an accepted generality,
suitable and dull-no longer is it deceptively obvious,
exploiting common sense-it is, rather, aU that is relentlessly
and endlessly reiterated by these encounters. On every side the
idea is being relayed. "When you awaken an observation,. a
certainty, a hope, they are already struggling somewhere,
elsezilhere, in anotherform.
Repetition, moreover, is an acknowledgedform ofconsciousness both here and elsewhere. Relentlessly resuming something
you have already said. Consenting to an infinitesimal
momentum, an addition perhaps unnoticed that stubbonuy
persists in your knowledge.
The difficulty: to keep this growing Pile of common places
from ending up as dispirited grumbling-may art provide!
Ihe probability: that you come to the bottom ofall confluences
ta mark more strongly your inspirations.Expanse and Filiation
In the Western world the hidden cause (the consequence) of
both Myth and Epic is filiation, its work setting out upon the
fixed linearity of tirne, always toward a projection, a project.
We can guess that energy circulated by philosophies of the
One in the West reinvigorated these imperatives of filiation.
Wherever time was not conceived of as linear-India, for
example-or where philosophers contemplated not the One
but the AlI, the founding myths did not generate the process
of filiation.* Conceptions of the origins of the world (its creation) were not corroborated in a genealogical sequence that
would have rooted the species (race or people) in this first
act.
The retelling (certifying) of a "creation of the world" in a
filiation guarantees that this same filiation-or legitimacyrigorously ensues simply by describing in reverse the trajectory of the community, from its present to this act of creation.
This view is not at the origin of every Western myth, but it is
the view that prevailed, determining the evolution of these
cultures.
In every instance, and of necessity, the mythical community precedes any thought of the individual, whose foremost
dimension is as a link in the chain of filiation.
*Among the Mayan and Aztec peoples a cyclical time-buttressed by a
passion for dating events-coincided with a tendency toward filiation,
reaching back as far as possible through ancient times, without, however~ anchoring itself in an undoubtable "creation" of the world.
47Buddhist mythologies, to offer an almost commonplace
comparison, are based on temporal cycles and consider first
of aU, and uniquely, the individual (himself impermanent or
almost so), whose "stories" are of selfperfection through dissolution into the AIl. The Buddha is the exemplary, but not
necessarily original, individuation, whose oneness is due to
this fulfillment. The One is distinguished from oneness, by
the total lack of any generalizable understanding in this latter. Aided by a collection of ritual precepts that do not constitute a body of Knowledge, each individual will su-ive to follow from afar the example of Buddha. The community's
chronology-its linearity (which in the \l\1est becomes History)-is completely ineffectual there.*
Western mythologies, in contrast, conceive of the individual
only insof~lI- as he is a participant in the community. It took the
appearance of Christ (who broke away from Hebrcw community participation, though relying on it, and brought humanity
into Christian universality) for the individual as such ta sublimate in his dignity the evolution of the community.
The chain of filiation (as hidden cause) would not, however, be despised or rejected at that point. Christ is above aIl
the Son. He consecrates filiation: being a descendant of
David and at the same time the Son of Gad who is Gad-and,
perhaps, ofwhom it would be heresy to say that he tao is Gocl.
Christian individuation did not result in a return flow of
histo1'Y, a cyclical renewal; on the contrary, by universalizing
linear time-be/ore and after Christ-it brought a chronology
of the human race into general use, initiating a History of
Humanity. It has been suggested that, in this instance, Christ
*1 quali[y this assessment as far as Chinese cultures are concemed. At
least to my knowledge (mediocre at best) we have not yet, perhaps,
been able lü study the full-sense these cultures attribute tü histürical
relation Of whcther or not thcy envisage philosophies of History.
(':\Te are recapitulating what we knO\v of these müvements, in an
attempt to considcr how the)' have come into our view. And frequently
we make mistakes. '''That is important is that wc start retracing the path
f<.Jr üurselves.)
48marked a decisive break, uniting the histories of comrnunities into this generalized History.
This chain of Christian filiation, however, would no longer
be considered absolute at the mornent that another continuous sequence, this time based on science, inscribed the
human race within the network of evolution. In the end this
network is only an objectivized vision of the oid filiation,
applied not to the legitimacy of an ethnie community but to
the natural universality of aIl known species.
At that moment the generalization inspired by Christ was
picked up by Darwin's generalizing theory, though initially
they opposed each othee Both were concerned with transcending the old mythical filiation linked to the destiny of a
community, to go beyond this with a universalizing notion
that would retain, however, the power of the principle of linearity and that "grasped" and justified History.
Paradoxically, in Buddhist thought, in which the aim is to
dissolve the individual within the AlI, there is only individuation. In Western systems of thought, solicitous of the dignity
of the human individual and originating with individual
adventure, there ends up being-another paradox-only
generalization. Philosophies based on the One bear within
them the embryo of History (whether Natural History or the
History of Humanity).
As Mediterranean myths tell us, thinking about One is not
thinking about AlI. These myths express communities, each
one innocently transparent for self and threateningly opaque
for the other. They are functional, even if they take obscure
or devious means. They suggest that the selfs opacity for the
other is insurmountable, and, consequently, no rnatter how
opaque the other is for oneself (no myth ever provides for
the legitimacy of the other), it will always be a question of
reducing this other to the transparency experienced by oneself. Either the other is assimilated, or else it is annihilated.
That is the whole principle of generalization and its entire
process.
49Myth, therefore, contains a hidden violence that catches
in the links of filiation and absolutely challenges the existence of the other as an element of relation. The same is true
of the Epic, which singles out a community in relation to the
Other, and senses Being only as in-itself, because it never conceives of it as relation.
Whether in myth or epic, not only does Being (I would calI
it Being-as-Being) obviously not partake of the nature of the
individual, but there is not even a "premonition" of individuality in the epic. Then, with Plato, the individual becornes the
tomb of the soul. In this way the philosopher introduces the
process ofindividuation and generalization into the tradition
of Near Eastern thought, where it is sometimes harmonious,
sometimes conflicting. This will be completed (resolved) in
the occurrence of Christ. Christ, and He alone, manifested
incarnation without the FaU, filiation without the weight of
heredity. In him Parmenidean Being and Platonic soul are
joined. It is, however, possible to make a case for the real
"break" in Western thought having taken place with Plato.
Filiation is explicit in the Old Testament; it is implicit in the
Iliad, in which the reputed or chosen sons of Gods play out
the pr~jected rivalries of the Immortals among themselves. It
is legitimacy that is disrupted by the abduction of Helen
(with its threat of métissage-mixing the blood of East and
West); and legitimacy, perhaps, inseparable from the project
of discovery and knowledge, provides the tragic driving force
for the Odyssey (Ulysses and Penelope's faithfulness to each
other); legitimacy, in any case (with the realization of métissage), is the cause of weakness in the epic of Alexander. Filiation is indispensable for the Aeneid. And, if Dante does not
have recourse to it in The Divine Comedy (because Christ had
already realized the universal Church by then), he nonetheless places his journey into hell-in short, into our worldunder the enlightened guidance of Virgil (tu duca, tu segnore, e tu maestro). He does so not simply because Virgil was
at that time the master of poetics but also because he went
50beyond the break at the time of Christ to reestablish continuity (through concern with filiation and its action) with one
of the matrices of Myth, the city of Troy. From Homer to Virgil the threat of métissage ceased to seem calamitous. Thus,
from the outset The Divine Comedy, one of the greatest rnonuments of Christian universalization, stresses the filiation
shared by the ancient myths and the new religion Iinking
both to the creation of the world.
If l try to simplify, reducing and summarizing my thoughts
concerning these two Western "rnovenlents" of generalization (Christian and Darwinian), and if l compare them with
things l think l know about their Buddhist equivalent, l come
up with the following formulation:
CHRIST.- To an undivided ethnic community, with the
legitimacy of filiation, an individualizing act that inaugurates
a History of Humanity is appended. Thus, the exclusive linearity of this filiation is succeeded by the undiversifiable linearity of a generalization.
DARWIN.- To an original indistinction the process ofSelection that governs evolution and determines the distinction
among genera and species is applied. The linearity of the
process leads into the diversifiable generalization of Natural
History.
BUDDHA.- Through a primordial movement of circularity
the individual strives in search of perfection toward a dissolution within the AlI. His successive lives are the cycles ("the
histories") ofthis perfection and do not constitute a Iinearity.
At the end of a process he is reincarnated: he is the same and
yet other.
It is scarce1y important that Christian generalization originated in a choice, whereas Darwinian generalization was the
result of an objective observation. Both are linked to an identical spirit of universality-in opposition to community's
exclusivity or to Nature's heterogeneity; both reach
fulfillment at the end of a line; both already are and further
become the propagation of a Knowledge. The Buddhist gyre
51never proceeds from generalization: it is not linear and does
not depart from individualization. The approach to Nirvana
is impossible ta generalize through knowledge but is particularized through knowledges.
The consequence (the hidden cause) of both Epic and
Tragedl', then, is legitimacl"
Tragedy springs from anl' situation in which community
consent is threatened. Something is "tragic" because the
threat will not be discovered (held off or deferred) until the
moment in which the community Jeels that the chain of filiation has been broken. The tragic action is the uncovering of
what had gone unnoticed.
Engendering tragedl', it is illegitimacy that threatens the
comrnunity bl' leading toward its dissolution. Tragic action,
the art of opacitl' and disclosure, resolves this dissolution in
the quest for legitimacl' and its reestablishment. This same
quest, in ml'th and epic, guaranteed the strict succession
through which everl' communitl' linked itself to the first act
of Creation. If legitirnacl' is ruptured, the chain of filiation is
no longer meaningful, and the community wanders the
world, no longer able to lal' claim to any primordial necessity.
Tragic action absorbs this unbalance.
Tragic action is progressive and carried out within opacity,
because the violence linked to filiation (the absolute exclusion of the other) cannot be faced head on nor aIl at once.
Such a conh'Ontation would have left the communitl' reeling
from a surfeit of understanding, a sort of short-circuit of consciousness. Wars and conquests mask for the community the
violence of this exclusion of the other. But things that one
can valiantly endure in battle, whose pretext has been calculated or improvised, becorne unbearable in the sacred contemplation of the root. Whence the importance in tragedy of
the art of unveiling. Oedipus would be incapable of conceiving "at first sight" the truth that lies within him.
This is also whl' the City is threatened bl' the same force
52that elects within it a para-fate hero, focusing the thunderboIt, who takes it upon himself to resolve the dissolution.
Public consciousness was incapable of discussing a resolution: generalizing (politicizing) the discussion would have
meant the community was no longer inscribed in the primordial and sacred legitimacy provided by filiation but in the
problematic (threatening) relation to the other. This relation would already consist ofwhat, without elaborating, 1 call
"expanse" [l'étendue].
This explains why the atternpts-in Greek theater-to
shore up (to "expand") the power of tragedy (by diversifying
and multiplying characters, exposing their rnotives-aH
those "improvements" from Aeschylus to Sophocles to
Euripides) serve equally as paths leading away from sacred
awe, until gradually theater's citizen forms-drama, comedy,
etc.-are introduced.
In an exemplary case, that of Oedipus, Freudian reinterpretation of the myth confirms the process of filiation implicated there and atternpts to generalize this process. But we
shaH see that what opposes this new sort of generalization is,
in fact, the expansion, power, and reality that we shaH define,
whose presupposition is the opposite of filiation.
Shakespeare is considered to have confirrned this work of
legitimacy in his theater. If there is something rotten in Denmark, it is because the "line" of succession to the tlwone has
been broken, demanding catharsis with Hamlet as victim.
During this same period Camoens, in his epic poetry, was
renouncing the sacrifice of a propitiating hero, singing
instead of a comrnunity of heroes who set off to conquer the
world.
In The Tempest, however, Shakespeare conceived of these
two dimensions, both founding legitimacy and power of conquest, as ultimately working together. It is because Prospero
is the legitirnate duke of Milan that he has authority over Caliban, the elements, and the universe. Here the destiny of the
City expands according to the dimensions of the known and
53colonizable wodd. It is not, in the end, through the sacrifice
(or punishment) of the hero that things in dissolution are
resolved but through the reestablishment of his power, formerly usurped. Prospero is distinguished, in fact, from Hamlet, Macbeth, Richard III, and the whole stream of claimants
to the English tlu'one (aIl characters thrust into situations
that "will turn out weIl": through their sacrifice or their extermination, that is, through a return to legitimacy), precisely
for that reason: he is the beneficiary, right from the start, of
this legitimacy. For this same reason The lempest is not a
tragedy but a heroic/historical drama. Because, if the play
"turns out weIl," it is not from the point of view of the community (the city of Milan, which had never been threatened
by dissolution-the usurper, Prospero's brother, moreover,
never having seemed particularly serious). 1t is solely from
the point of view of the hero, the bearer of Westernness, in
order to assert the legitimacy of his power over the worId. A
decolonized Caliban occupies this expanse and challenges
Prospero's projective legitimacy. He does so in two ways, the
same two that from the beginnings of time have made it possible to relay mythic, epic, or tragic obscurity: through the
individual ardor of lyricism and the collective practice of politics.
When, in fact, epic and tragedy had run their course in the
West (after the City had reassured itself about its own existence), they yielded to these two modes: the lyric and the
political, both out in the open, where individuals were
engaged as human persons, that is, as individuals apart from
the sacred mystery of the collective community.
Yet the lyrics and politics of Caliban revived this mystery,
with ail its epic power and tragic disclosure, and did so, moreover, without returning to the intolerance underlaid by Myth,
thus opening out onto a new order of community (of the
planet Earth, henceforth so fragile and threatened) whose
legitimacy is still neither self-evident nor sanctioned. Tragedy
has here a new requirement, a new object for its renewed art
of disclosure.
54Today it is not only the legitimacy of cultures that is threatened in the world (the life energy of peoples); also threatened are their relations of equivalency. A modern epic and a
modern tragedy would offer to unite the specificity of
nations, granting each culture's opacity (though no longer as
en-soi) yet at the same time imagining the transparency of
their relations. Imagining. Because this transparency is precisely not en-soi. It is not rooted in any specific legitimacy,
which thus implies that the disclosure of tragedy would be
directed toward a continuurn (in expansion) and not toward
a past (set in filiation).
Modern epic and modern tragedy would express political
consciousness (no longer an impossible naive consciousness)
but one disengaged from civic frenzy; they would ground lyricism in a confluence of speech and writing. In this
confluence things of the community, without being diminished (and without turning truths into generalities as Christian tragedy-in the work of Eliot or Claudel-meant to do),
would be the initiation to totality without renouncing the
particular. In that way modern epic and modern tragedy
would make the specific relative, without having to merge the
Other (the expanse of the world) into a reductive transparency.*
Reticulated in such a network, the former sacred power of
filiation would not be the exclusive player; the resolution of
elements in dissolution here would be relayed by the aggregation of things that are scattered. This is what Segalen called
the action of Diversity. No longer would the sacrifice of a propitiating, or victim-hero be required; for we are able to
untangle this web, pondering it together and recognizing
ourselves side by side within it.
We will look straight at the sacred, the assumed order in
the disorder of Relation, without being stricken with awe. We
will discuss it without the solemn chant of the Greek Chorus
*The imagined transparency of Relation is, in that way, the opposite of
the reductive transparency of the generalizing universal.
55fôr our sole influence. We will imagine it without divining the
hand of a god there full force. To imagine the tranparency of
Relation is also ta justify the opacity of what impels it. The
sacred is of us, of this network, of our wandering, our
errantry.
There (here) the idea of filiation, its energy, its linear
force, no longer function-fôr us; nor is the root setting and
conquering legitimacy an imperative; nor, consequently, is
any ontologically based generalization required.
At the moment that the West projected into the wodd for
the first time, this began to be realized. This prqject of discovery and ascendancy was taken to be an absolute value. It
was even asserted that both geographical discoveries and the
conquests of science were driven by the same audacity and
the same capacity for generalization. Territorial conquest
and scientific discovery (the terms are interchangeable) were
reputed to have equal worth. The absolute of ancient filiation and conquering linearity, the project of knowledge and
arrowlike nomadism, each used the other in its growth. But l
maintain that, right frorn the first shock of conquest, this
movement contained the embryo (no matter how deferred
its realization might have seemed) that would transcend the
duality that started it.
Let us, then, press on past this duality. Let us not start by
confusing discovery and conquest, which was the point of
Daniel Boorstin's book about scientific disdosure, The Discoverers (whose subtitle in the French translation by Robert Lat:·
fone [1989] is "From Herodotus to Copernicus-From
Christopher Columbus to Einstein-The adventures of the
men who invented the wodd"). Which means, of course, that
these masters of the Voyage and these masters of Knowledge
are one and the same. At the end of chapter 26, "An Empire
without Wants," Boorstin wrltes: "Fully equipped with the
technology, the intelligence, and the national resources to
become discoverers, the Chinese doomed themselves to be
the discovered." 1
Ajudgment of this sort implies that, in Relation, the ones
56who "discovered" retain absolutely the advantages of this
action. But Relation does not "grasp" any such antecedent.
The terra incognita lying before us is an inexhaustible sphere
of variations born of the contact among cultures. Disclosure
applies to this inexhaustibility in an expansion of a different
sort. "Discovery," projection, arrowlike nomadism, or project
of knowledge, becornes lost there or gains through the network. The powers of domination prosper there, but legitimacies are dead.*
Williarn Faulkner's Absalom! Absalom! following lessons
learned from the Oedipus rnyth (or, later, the Oedipus complex), concerns a possible incest, a perversion of filiation.
But the decisive-fatal-element would be part of another
"causal series": that is, the intrusion of Negro blood. At first,
in the planter Sutpen's first wife, a Haitian woman, it was
undiscernible. Once this black stock was discovered (recalling how southern aristocratie famiIies in the United States
usually dread and are frequently haunted by this sort of "rnisdeed" committed by careless great-grandparents), Sutpen,
the founder, decided to repudiate mother and son and to
replant his stock in Mississippi. But neither founding nor
filiation can be begun again, and Sutpen's history catches up
with him. That this first son whom he had cast out into the
void and the daughter of his second marriage would come to
love each other is calamity enough; but the discovery that his
first son, despite his appearance, is Negro (which Sutpen
alone had known for a long time) finally brings together the
conditions for filiation to dissolve permanently into the new
expanse of extension. This is the double object of disclosure
in the novel. Incest changes the course of filiation, and vice
versa; for the novel suggests that there (in the South) incest
*Ideological thought is not going to be satisfied "vith the expression
"powers of domination" but will demand that the terms--politicaI, economic, or cultural- be specified. But we know today that these terms
cannot be calculated a priori and that each time, in each locus of domination, through the resistance of those oppressed, a precise and not
generalizable sense of the oppression here and now emerges.
57might be accepted, conceived of, but not the intrusion of
black blood-which is nonetheless there.
Expanse: in which Africa (for us a source and a mirage,
retained in a simplified representation) has, therefore, its
role to play. In aIl of Faulkner's work the pileup of
patronyms, of mixings of blood whether forced or not, of
double lineages (black and white), relentlessly reproduces
and almost caricatures the extended family style that has so
long contributed to the formation of the Caribbean social
fabric. It is no accident that Sutpen, unknowingly at first,
encountered his fate in Haiti. The protagonists of this story,
except for the ones chosen by their innocence-epic being
naive-to be its narrators, are stricken by a tragic stupor (a
word so similar in my mind to Sutpen that 1 pronounced it
Stutpen for a long time). But the tragic crisis, magnificently
and ritually brought to completion in the burning of the
House of Sutpen, will not restore legitirnacy; on the contraIT,
this moment consecrates the inevitable obliteration of it.
Faulknerian tragedy is at odds with that of Aeschylus: it does
not contribute to reestablishing the balance of a community;
it commits the heresy of destroying the sacredness of filiation; it closes the history of the sons of Solomon forever and
lays out the prospect open to the sons of Snopes, the unmitigated upstart. Like any great tragic system, Faulkner's work
ignores, that is, it encompasses and goes beyond, politics and
lyricism, but it makes us contend with their contemporary
poles: violence and opacity.
(Expanse [extending] ramifies its web. Leap and variance, in
another poetics. Transversality. Quantifiable infinity. Unrealized quantity. Inexhaustible tangle. Expanse [extending] is
not merely space; it is also its own drearned time.)
(Let's open another and deciding parenthesis: the Oedipus
cornplex does not function in the expanse that is extension.
Neither rnothering nor fathering are factors there. The Oedipus cornplex depends on laws of filiation, whereas an
58extended family is circular and meshed, as is the web of
Faulkner's work. (And within this parenthesis we'll open yet
another: that aIl the interpretations (of our societies) dominated by themes of filiation-the phallie, the oedipal, the
maternaI complex, etc., and you must admit there are more
of these than there is need for them-epitomize ethnocentric and frequently naive projections of Western thought. If
we take this further: in Roger Dragonetti's La vie de la lettre au
Moyen Age (Paris: Editions du Seuil, 1980) 1 picked up an
interesting observation concerning the felninine character
of the (maternaI) languages that appeared in the Middle
Ages, as opposed to the normative, paternal authority of
Latin:
The privilege accorded to the femininity of language
(the reverse image of the theology of the Father) arises
with the birth of romance languages. The result of this
is that in preference to Latin the mystery of the poetry
of languages is concIusively joined with the mystery of
mother tangues, languages of the desire whose distant
essence, the indeterminate and indeterminable object
of every quest, is symbolized in turns by the fin 'amor, the
sister, the lady, the queen or the virgin-mother. (45-46)
A valuable observation, yet one that 1 think would not
apply in the context of our Caribbean cultures, for exalnple,
in the emergence of the Creole language. The French language during the period of creolization was not the sole language of literacy, as Latin was during the Middle Ages (even
if there did exist from the eighth to the eleventh centuries a
Zingua romana rustica). It was, instead, a living idiom that was
playing out its history elsewhere-there (here) where, even
more irnportant, aIl irnposition of filiation had been forsaken. The legitimacy confirming filiation in patriarchal societies also implies fenlininity as the locus of a counterforce,
generally of a spiritual order. This is what Dragonetti found
happening at the birth of romance languages. In matriarchal
59societies legitimacy was "natural" (impossible, fôr example,
to doubt the function of the mother) and could not have
been raised to the status of a value.* Afr"ÎCan cultures, consequently, despite the "chain" of Ancestors, do not seem to me
to obey filiation 's hidden violence. The same is true of our
heterogeneous societies. Creole tongues, mother tongues
vary too much within them to "be conjoined," to be prized as
an essence or to be valorized as a symbol of either the mother
or the father. Their threatened violence is, admittedly, a synthesis but one spread throughout the expanse. This violence
has been brought to a crisis bya new fact that is suddenly part
of the existence of conternporary languages: their widespread and uneasy consciousness that they are subject to disappeal'ance. Languages no longer die away gently; they no
longer develop innocently. No symbolic system can resist aIl
this stuff). Just as early discoverers/discovered are equal in
Relation, the legitimate and its opposite appeal to each
other. That is, legitimacy is totally replaced by contingency.
(Someone has suggested to me that adojJtion has a truly generative function.) 1 am fully aware of the forms of domination
perpetuated by present-day heirs of the discoverers and of
their intentions to restore filiation "elsewhere"-by imposing
*These analyses ahout hackground do not stop us From ohserving that
oppression of women can intensif)' in the heart of a matrifucal society.
(I would still hesitate to describe Antillean societies as rnatrilinear.) In
large pan the respective attitudes of men and women in their relations
here were detennined by colonial pressures. Collective dependence
reinfurced the "reproductive" machismo of male slaves but did not
authorÎLe the appearancc of femininity as a spiritual counterfurce,
even if women were frequently centers of resistance. This is "vhy, perhaps, at least this is what l think, the women oLvlartinique and in many
colonized countries have a tendency in their socialil<ltion to disregard
feminism and to pass directly to various conquests ot power, both social
and political. Feminism is, also, the luxury by means ofwhich women in
the yVest through thcir struggles transform their ancient pseudopower,
their spiritual counterforce into l'cal equality. Be that as it may, there is
an equal1y high number of equally intense violent incidents, rapes, and
incest in which women are the victims everywhere.
60familial or cultural rnodels and ways of life or settings for
this-wherever it had not already exerted its silent power to
put down roots. But taking root, henceforth, will be of a different nature. It is in relation. Filiation cannot be replanted
elsewhere; its myth is not infinitely disclosable; and Oedipus
cannot be exported-into the expanse of extension).
What, then, will both violence and opacity be for us in Relation? It was to better assess such questions that we embarked
on these interweaving journeys to the sources of Western
thoughts-thoughts aimed at, but not inventing, the world.
Today the ancient intolerant violence of filiation is shaken
up in the anarchistic violence of cIashing cultures, in which
no projection imposes its line and in which-this bears
repeating- legitimacy (with its resultant imperative succession of the law and order of reasons, linked to the order
derived from possessions and conquests) cornes undone.
lnherited domination stemming from conquest and possession persists and grows more attractive, but within these
voluminous circularities the lines become lost: light shed by
ideological analysis is no longer enough to flush this dornination into the open.* The resistance to contemporary forms
of domination, too visible and at the same time undetectable
and untouchable, is in turn limited in time and place, with
no possibility (at the moment) of support from another locus
of resistance. lnternationals of suffering cannot be publicly
structured in this circularity, even though lnternationals of
oppression are secretly planted there.
If it is true that the intolerant violence of filiation was formerly buried in the sacred mystery of the root, and that
entering into the opacity of this mystery was tragically
granted, and if this opacity therefore both signified the mystery and simultaneously masked its violence-this always took
*1 inc1ude under the heading "ideology" critical and political philosophies that have contributed to "revealing" ideologies.
61place in function of a final underlying transparency in the
tragic struggle. This same transparency, in Western History,
predicts that a common truth of Mankind exists and maintains that what approaches it most closely is action that projects, whereby the world is realized at the same time that it is
caught in the act of its foundation.
Against this reductive transparency, a force of opacity is at
work. No longer the opacity that enveloped and reactivated
the mystery of filiation but another, considerate of aB the
threatened and delicious things joining one another (without conjoining, that is, without merging) in the expanse of
Relation.
Thus, that which protects the Diverse we calI opacity. And
henceforth we shaH caH Relation 's imaginary a transparency,
one that for ages (ever since the Pre-Socratics? or the
Mayans? in Timbuktu already? ever since the pre-Islamic
poets and the lndian storyteHers?) has had premonitions of
its unforeseeable whirl.
For centuries "generalization," as operated by the "Vest,
brought different community tempos into an equivalency in
which it attempted to give a hierarchical order to the times
they flowered. Now that the panorama has been determined
and equidistances described, is it not, perhaps, time to return
to a no less necessary "degeneralization"? Not to a replenished outrageous excess of specificities but to a total
(dreamed-of) freedom of the connections among them,
cleared out of the very chaos of their confrontations.
62Closed Place, Open Word
1
The Plantation system spread, following the same structural
principles, throughout the southern United States, the
Caribbean islands, the Caribbean coast ofLatin America, and
the northeastern portion of Brazil. It extended throughout
the countries (including those in the lndian Ocean), constituting what Patrick Chamoiseau and Raphaël Confiant calI
the territory of créolité [creoleness].l There are grounds for
understanding why, despite very different linguistic areas
engaged in very divergent political dynamics, the same organization would create a rhythm of economic production and
form the basis for a style oflife. That takes care of the spatial
aspect.
Regarding time, or, if you will, our grasp of the histories
that converged in these spaces, two other questions need to
be addressed. The first concerns the system's evolution: Why
was there no continuation of it an)"vhere-no social structure organically derived from it, with coherent or contradictory repercussions, inscribed in any enduring aspect? The
Plantation system collapsed everywhere, brutally or progressively, without generating its own ways of superseding itself.
The second question is even more amazing: How did a system that was so fragile give rise,paradoxically, to what are
63seen as the modern vectors of civilization, in the not untolerant sense that this word henceforth holds for us?
Let us SUITl up in a few connected phrases what we know of
the Plantation. It is an organization formed in a social pyramid, confined within an enclosure, functioning apparently as
an autarky but actually dependent, and with a technical
mode ofproduction that cannot evolve because it is based on
a slave structure.
A pyramid organization: ever)"vhere after 1848 the origin of
the mass of slaves, then workers, was African-or Hindu in
the Caribbean; the middle level, managers, administrators,
and overseers, were hired men of European origin, a small
numbcr ofwhom were replaced early in this century by people of color-once again in the Caribbean; at the top of the
pyramid were the planters, colonists, or békés, as they were
called in the Antilles, who strove to constitute a white
pseudoaristocracy. 1 say pseudo because almost nowhere
were these attempts at putting down roots within a tradition
sanctioned by the stamp of time nor by any legitimacy of
absolute filiation. Plantations, despite secreting manners and
customs, From which cultures ensued, never established any
tradition of great impact.
An enclosed place: each Plantation was defined by boundaries whose crossing was strictly forbidden; impossible to
leave without written permission or unless authorized by
sorne rituaI exception, such as Carnival time. Chapel or
church, stockrooms for distributing supplies or later the grocery story, infirmary or hospital: everything was taken care of
within a closed circle. Now the folIo\ving is what we need to
understand: How could a series of autarkies, from one end to
the other of the areas involved, fI'om Louisiana to Martinique
to Réunion, be capable of kinship? If each Plantation is considered as a closed entity, what is the principle inclining them
to function in a similar manner?
64Finally, the reality of slavery. It was decisive, of course, in
the stagnation of production techniques. An insurmountable
tendency toward technical irresponsibility resulted from it,
especially among slaveholders. And when technical innovations, mechanization, and industrialization occurred, as they
did, for example, in the southern United States, it was
already too late. Social dynamics had taken other routes than
cane traces, sugarcane alleys, or avenues of magnolias. As for
the slaves or their close descendants, who had absolutely no
interest in the Plantation's yield, they would be an exception
to this technical irresponsibility because of their own need to
guarantee daily survival on the edges of the system. This
resulted in the widespread developrnent of small occupations, or what is referred to in the Antilles as djobs, a habituaI
economy of bits and scraps. Technical irresponsibility on the
one hand and a breakdown into individual operations on the
other: immobility and fragmentation lay at the heart of the
system eating away at it.
Let us, nonetheless, consult these ruins with their uncertain
evidence, their extremely fragile monuments, their frequently incomplete, obliterated, or ambiguous archives. You
can guess already what we are to discover: that the Plantation
is one of the focal points for the development of present-day
modes of Relation. Within this universe of domination and
oppression, of silent or professed dehumanization, fonns of
humanity stubbornly persisted. In this outrnoded spot, on
the margins of every dynamic, the tendencies of our modernity begin to be detectable. Our first attempt must be to
locate just such contradictions.
One ofthese contradictions contrasts the tidy composition
of such a universe-in which social hierarchy corresponds in
maniacal, minute detail to a rnercilessly maintained racial
hierarchy-with the ambiguous complexities otherwise proceeding from it.
Airtight seais were apparently the rule of the Plantation.
Not simply the tight social barrier but also an irremediable
65break between fonns of sensibility, despite each one 's effects
upon the other. Saint:John Perse and Faulkner, two authors
born in Plantation regions and to whom 1 constantly turn,
not surprisingly, with my questions, provide us with a chance
ta assess this split. We recall the famous description, if it is a
description, in Éloges:
but 1 .shall still long rernernber
rnute jaces, the colour ofPapaya and of boredorn that
paused like burnt-out stars behind our chairs . ..2
That papaya and that boredorn--seeing people as
things-do not so much emphasize the poet's distance as
they reveal the radical separation (that imposible apartheid)
presiding over the life of the emotions in the Plantation. 1
have also noted that Faulkner, who spoke so frequently of
blacks, never sets out to write one of the interior monologues, of which he is such a master, for one of these characters; whereas he dares do so for sorne of the mulattoes in his
work and even, in a tour de force now classic, for the idiot
Benjy at the beginning of his novel The Sound and the Fury.
Thus Lucas, the black character who is the principal hero of
lntruder in the Dust, is never interiorized by Faulkner; he is
described entirely through postures and gestures, a silhouette filled in against a horizon. lntruder in the Dust is not a
novel concerning an essence but, rather, an attempt at a phenomenological approach. In the same novel Faulkner, moreover, is explicit about his narrator's understanding-or lack
thereof:.-of the southern black: "Because he knew Lucas
Beauchalnp too-as weIl that is as any white person knew
him. Better than any maybe."3 As if the novelist, rejected by
members of his class and misunderstood by the black Americans who have had access to his work, had premonitions ofan
impossibility brought to a head by history. The break exerts
itself here.
But the break did not fOrIn delimited territories, in which
the various levels of population were sectioned off. The clairn
66that they were reciprocally extraneous did not prevent contaminations, inevitable within the enclosure of the Plantation.
Despite the insistent, coId ferocity of Father Labat's writing,
for example, beneath the words of this seventeenth-century
chronicler of the Antilles one can feel a curiosity, riveted,
anxious, and obsessive, whenever he broaches the subject of
these slaves that he struggles so hard to keep calm. Fear, fantasies, and perhaps a barely wiIling flicker of complicity form
the undercurrent of the revolts and repressions. The long list
ofmartyrdoms is also a long métissage, whether involuntary or
intentional.
A second contradiction contrasts the Plantation's will to
autarky with its dependence, in reality, in relation to the
external world. The transactions it fustered with this world
took place in the elementary form of the exchange of goods,
usually at a loss. Payrnent was in kind, or as an equivalent
exchange value, which led to accumulation neither of experience nor of capital. Nowhere did the Planters rnanage to set
up organisrns that were sufficiently solid and autonomous to
allow them to have access to the control of a market, means
of international transportation, an independent system of
money, or an efficient and specific representation in foreign
markets. The Plantations, entities turned in upon themselves, paradoxically, have aIl the syrnptoms of extroversion.
They are dependent, by nature, on someplace elsewhere. In
their practice of importing and exporting, the established
politics is not decided from within. One could say, in fact,
that, socially, the Plantation is not the product of a politics
but the emanation of a fantasy.
And, if we corne even closer to this enclosed place, this
Locus Solus, trying to imagine what its inner ramifications
may be, auscultating the memory or guts inside it, then the
contradictions become rnadness. 1 shaH not attempt any
description here. This CUITent year would not suffice. And we
are familiar enough with the countless novels and films
inspired by this universe to know already that, from north to
south and from west to east, the same conditions of life
67repeat themselves. Rather, 1 shaH turn to another synthesizing aspect, in this case both oral and written expression-literature-stemming either direct1y or indirect1y from the
Plantation.
2
No matter which region we contemplate from among those
covered by the system, we find the same trajectory and almost
the saIne forms of expression. We could mark out three
moments: literary production-first as an act of survival, then
as a dead end or a delusion, finally as an effort or passion of
memory.
An act of survival. In the silent universe of the Plantation,
oral expression, the only form possible for the slaves, was discontinuously organized. As tales, proverbs, sayings, songs
appeared-as much in the Creole-speaking world as elsewhere-they bore the stamp of this discontinuity. The texts
seem to neglect the essentials ofsomething that Western realism, from the beginning, had been able to cover so weIl: the
situation of landscapes, the lesson of scenery, the reading of
customs, the description of the motives of characters. Almost
never does one find in them any concrete relating of daily
facts and deeds; what one does find, on the other hand, is a
symbolic evocation of si tuations. As if these texts were striving
for disguise beneath the symbol, working to say without saying. This is what 1 have referred to elsewhere as detour, 4 and
this is where discontinuity struggles; the same discontinuity
the Maroons created through that other detour called marronnage.
Here we have a form ofliterature striving to express some-
68thing it is forbidden to refer to and finding risky retorts to
this organic censorship every time. The oralliterature of the
Plantations is consequently akin to other subsistance-survivaI--techniques set in place by the slaves and their immediate descendants. Everywhere that the obligation to get
around the rule of silence existed a literature was created
that has no "natural" continuity, if one may put it that way,
but, rather, bursts forth in snatches and fragments. The storyteller is a handyman, the djobbeur of the collective soul.
Though this phenomenon is widespread throughout the
system, nonetheless, it is within the Creole-speaking realm
that it stands out most conspicuously. That is because, in
addition to this obligation to get around something, the Creole language has another, internaI obligation: to renew itself
in every instance on the basis of a series of forgettings. Forgetting, that is, integration, of what it starts from: the multiplicity of Mrican languages on the one hand and European
ones on the other, the nostalgia, finally, for the Caribbean
remains of these.* The linguistic movement of creolization
proceeded through very rapid, interrupted, successive settlings of these contributions; the synthesis resulting from this
process never became fixed in its terms, despite having
asserted from the beginning the durability of its structures.
In other words, the Creole text is never presented linguistically as an edict or a relay, on the basis ofwhich sorne literary
progression might be detected, with another text corning
along to perfect the forrrler, and so on. 1 do not know if this
diffraction (through which multilingualism is, perhaps, really
at work, in an underground way, for one of the first known
times in the history of humanities) is indicative of aIl languages in formation-here, for example, we would have to
study the European Middle Ages-or if it is entirely attribut-
*It is the problem of "forgetting" that has made the various Creole
dialects so fragile-in comparison to the languages composing them,
especially French wherever it is in authority, as in Guadeloupe and Martinique.
69able to the particular situation of the Plantation in the
Caribbean and the Indian Ocean.
Then delusion. Unlike this oral and popular literature,
though equally discontinuous, another, written and elitist literature developed. The colonists and the Planters, as well as
the travelers who visited thern, were possessed of a real need
tu justify the system. To fantasize legitimacy. And, of course,
this is why, unlike what happened in the oral texts, the
description of reality would turn out to be indispensable to
them-and irrefutable in their terms. Reality was fantasized
here as weIl, its image the product of a disguised apol06'Y
rather than that of an austere realism. One condition of the
process was that conventional landscape be pushed to
extremes-the gentleness and beauty of it-particularly in
the islands of the Caribbean. There is something of an involuntary Parnassus in the novels and paluphlets written bl'
colonists of Santo Domingo and Martinique: the same
propensity to blot out the shudders of life, that is, the turbulent realities of the Plantation, beneath the conventional
splendor of scenery.
Another convention provided the occasion for a specifie
category of writing. The supposedly receptive lascIviousness
of the slaves, mulatto women and men who were of mixed
blood, and the animal savagery with which the Africans were
credited, produced an abundant supply for the erotic literature fIourishing in the islands fI'OIll the seventeenth to the
end of the nineteenth century. In this manner, from one
blind spot to the next, a literature of illusion came into
being, one moreover that, every now and then, was not lacking charm or an old-fashioned grace. Lafcadio Hearn, an
international reporter and a writer as well, came from
Louisiana to the Antilles at the turn of the century, sending
us a much embellished report.
Memory. After the System collapsed the literatures that had
asserted themselves within its space developed, for the most
70part, from the general traits so sketchily indicated here,
either consenting to them or taking an opposite course.
Thus, Caribbean literatures, whether in English, Spanish, or
French, tended to introduce obscurities and breaks-like so
rnany detours-into the material they dealt with; putting into
practice, like the Plantation tales, processes of intensification, breathlessness, digression, and immersion of individual
psychology within the draIna of a common destiny. The symbolism of situations prevailed over the refinement of
realisms, by encompassing, transcending, and shedding light
upon it. This, of course, is equally true of a writer of Creole
such as the Haitian Franketienne as of a novelist from the
United States such as Toni Morrison.
So, too, the works that appeared in these countries went
against the convention of a falsely legitirnizing landscape
scenery and conceived oflandscape as basically irnplicated in
a story, in which it too was a vivid character.
So, finally, historical marronage intensified over rime to
exert a creative marronage, whose numerous forms of expression began to fonn the basis for a continuity. Which made it
no longer possible to consider these literatures as exotic
appendages of a French, Spanish, or English literary corpus;
rather, they entered suddenly, with the force of a tradition
that they built themselves, into the relation of cultures.
But the truth is that their concern, its driving force and
hidden design, is the derangement of the mernory, which
determines, along with iInagination, our only way to tame
time.
Just how were our memory and our time buffeted by the
Plantation? Within the space apart that it comprised, the
always multilingual and frequently multiracial tangle created
inextricable knots within the web of filiations, thereby breaking the clear, linear order to which Western thought had
imparted such brilliance. So Alejo Carpentier and Faulkner
are of the sarne rnind, Edward Kamau Brathwaite and
Lezama Lima go together, l recognize myself in Derek Wal-
71cott, we take deIight in the coils of time in Garda Mârquez's
century of solitude. The ruins of the Plantation have affected
American cultures all around.
And, whatever the value of the explanations or the publicity Alex Haley afforded us with Roots, we have a strong sense
that the overly certain affiliation invoked there does not
really suit the vivid genius of our countries. Memory in our
works is not a calendar memory; our experience of time does
not keep company with the rhythms of month and year
alone; it is aggravated by the void, the final sentence of the
Plantation; our generations are caught up within an
extended family in which our root stocks have diffused and
everyone had two names, an official one and an essential
one-the nickname given by his community. And when in
the end it all began to shift, or rather collapse, when the
unstoppable evolution had emptied the enclosure of people
to reassemble them in the margins of cities, what remained,
what still remains, is the dark side of this impossible memory,
which has a louder voice and one that carries farther than
any chronicle or census.
The disintegration of the system left its marks. AImost
everywhere planter castes degenerated into fixed roIes, in
which memory no longer functioned except as decor-as
landscape had formerly elone. Occasionally, they were able to
switch to commerce; otherwise, they went to pieces in melancholy. Former employees here and there formeel groups of
so-calleel poor whites, who fed the ideologies of racist ten'or.
In the Caribbean and in Latin America the burgeoning shantytowns drew masses of the destitute and transformed the
rhythm of their voices. In the islands black and Hindu farmers went to war against arbitrariness and absolute poverty. In
the United States southern blacks went up North, following
the "underground railroael," toward cities that were becoming violently dehumanized, where, nonetheless the Harlem
writers, for example, wrote their Renaissance upon the walls
of solitude. Thus, urban literature made its appearance in
Bahia, New York, Jacmel, or Fort-de-France. The Plantation
72region, havingjoined with the endless terrain of haciendas or
latifundio, spread thin to end up in mazes of sheet metal and
concrete in which our cornrnon future takes its chances. This
second Plantation matrix, after that of the slave ship, is where
we must return to track our difficult and opaque sources.
3
It is notjust literature. When we examine how speech functions in this Plantation reaIrn, we observe that there are several almost codified types of expression. Direct, elementary
speech, articulating the rudimentary language necessary to
get work done; stifled speech, corresponding to the·silence
of this world in which knowing how to read and write is forbidden; deferred or disguised speech, in which men and
women who are gagged keep their words close. The Creole
language integrated these three rnodes and made themjazz.
It is understandable that in this universe every cry was an
event. Night in the cabins gave birth to this other enormous
silence from which music, inescapable, a murmur at first,
finally burst out into this long shout-a music of reserved
spirituality through which the body suddenly expresses itself.
Monotonous chants, syncopated, broken by prohibitions, set
free by the entire thrust of bodies, produced their language
from one end of this world to the other. These musical
expressions born of silence: Negro spirituals and blues, persisting in towns and growing cities; jazz, biguines, and calypsos, bursting into barrios and shantytowns; salsas and reggaes, assembled everything blunt and direct, painfully stifled,
and patiently differed into this varied speech. This was the
cry of the Plantation, transfigured into the speech of the
world.
73For three centuries of constraint had borne down sa hard
that, when this speech took root, it sprouted in the very midst
of the field of modernity; that is, it grew for everyone. This is
the only sort of universality there is: when, from a specific
enclosure, the deepest voice cries out.
4
Negative explanations for what is unique to the system are
clear: the decisive impact of the Mrican population, but with
the horrors of the slave trade as its beginning; the grasping
opposition to change inherent in pro-slavery assumptions;
the dependent relationship with the outside wodd that aIl
Plantations had in common.
But one can also see how this monstrously abortive f"ailure,
composed of so many solitary instances of sterility, had a positive effect on some portion of contemporary histories. -
How? is your question. How can you claim that such an
anomaly could have contributed to what you call modernity?
-1 believe 1 have answered this question or at least left clues
about how it may be answered.
The Plantation, like a laboratory, displays most clearly the
opposed forces of the oral and the written at work-one of
the most deep-rooted topics of discussion in our contemporary landscape. It is there that multilingualism, that threatened dimension of our universe, can be observed for one of
the first times, organically forming and disintegrating. It is
also within the Plantation that the meeting of cultures is most
clearly and directly observable, though none of the inhabitant" had the slightest hint that this was really about a clash of
cultures. Here we are able ta discover a few of the formational laws of the cultural métissage that concerns us aIl. It is
74essential that we investigate historicity-that cortiunction of a
passion for self-definition and an obsession with time that is
also one of the ambitions of contemporary literatures-in
the extensions of the Plantation, in the things to which it
gave birth at the very instant it vanished as a Eunctional unit.
Baroque speech, inspired by all possible speech, was ardently created in these same extensions and loudly caIls out to us from
them. The Plantation is one of the beIlies of the world, not
the only one, one arnong so many others, but it has the
advantage of being able to be studied with the utmost precision. Thus, the boundary, its structural weakness, becomes
our advantage. And in the end its seclusion has been conquered. The place was closed, but the word derived from it
remains open. This is one part, a limited part, of the lesson of
the world.
75Concerning a Baroque Abroad in the World
The baroque rnade its appearance in the West at a moment
when a particular idea of Nature-as harmonious, homogeneous, and thoroughly knowable-was in force. Rationalism
refined this conception, one convenient to its own increasing
ambition to master reality. At the same time, the spectacle of
Nature was supposedly something one couid reproduce:
knowledge and imitation set themselves up as mutuaI guarantors.
The ideai of imitation presupposed that beneath the appearance of things, but basic to thern, there lay the same "depth,"
sorne indubitable truth, led to primarily by the sciences and
more closely represented in art, to the extent that these representations systematized their reproductions of reality and
recognized the legitimacy of its aesthetic. Thus, the revolution in perspective in paintings from the beginnings of the
Quattrocento was conceived of as moving toward this depth.
Against this tendency a baroque "rerouting" emerged and
thrived. Baroque art was a reaction against the rationalist pretense ofpenetrating the mysteries of the known with one uniform and conclusive move. A baroque shudder, via this
rerouting, set out to convey that alI knowledge is to corne and
that this is what makes it of value. Baroque techniques, rnoreover, would favor "expansion" over "depth."
77This historically determined rerouting generated a new heroism in the approaeh to knowledge, a stubborn renouncement ofany ambition to sumrnarize the world's matter in sets
of imitative harmonies that would approach sorne essence.
Baroque art mustered bypasses, proliferation, spatial redundancy, anything that flouted the alleged unicity of the thing
known and the knowing of it, anything exalting quantity
infinitely resumed and totality infinitely ongoing.
The "historieal" baroque eonstituted, thus, a reaetion against
so-called natural order, naturally fixed as obvious faet. As conceptions of nature evolved and, at the same time, the worId
opened up for Western man, the baroque impulse also
became generalized. The baroque, the art of expansion,
expanded in concrete terms.
The first account of this was Latin A.merican religious art, so
close to lberian or Flemish baroque but so closely intermingled with autochthonous tones boldly introduced into the
baroque concert. These elements do not occur as innovations in the representation ofreality but as novel bits ofinformation concerning a nature that was definitely "new."
Baroque art ceased its adversarial role; it established an innovative vision (soon a different conception) of Nature and
acted in keeping with it.
This evolution reached its high point in métissage. Through
its vertiginous styles, languages and cultures hUl-tled the
baroque will. The generalization of métissage was aIl that the
baroque needed to become naturalized. From then on what
it expressed in the world was the proliferating contact of
diversified natures. It grasped, or rather gave-on-and-with,
this movement of the world. No longer a reaction, it was the
outcome of every aesthetic, or every philosophy. Consequently, it asserted not just an art or a style but went beyond
this to produce a being-in-the-world.
78Contemporary conceptions of the sciences encountered and
confirmed this expanding baroque. Science, of course, postulated that reality could not be defined on the basis of its
appearance, that it was necessary to penetrate into its
"depths," but it also agreed that knowledge of these was
always deferred, that no longer were there grounds for claiming to discover the essentials aIl of a piece. Science entered
an age of rational and basic uncertainties. That is, the conceptions of Nature expanded, became relative, which is the
very basis of the baroque tendency.
Conceptions of human nature were no longer based upon a
transparent model that was universally grounded or that
could be universally embodied. Being-in-the-world is nothing
without the quantified totality of every sort of being-in-society. Nor is it a cultural, irrefutable model. AlI human cultures
have experienced a classicism, an age of dogmatic certitude,
one that henceforth aIl must transcend together. And every
culture, at one time or another in its development, has contrived baroque disturbances against this certainty. And each
transcendence of this certainty was prophesied and simultaneously made possible by means of these disturbances. In this
full-sense the "depths" illuminated by Western science, psychology, and sociology are in refutation of "depth," sensed by
this same West's classicism alone. Therein lies the movement
of the baroque spreading into the world.
We can sum this up: the baroque has undergone a naturalization, notjust as art and style but as a way ofliving the unitydiversity of the world. This process of naturalization prolongs
the baroque and recreates it, beyond the flarnboyant realrns
of a unique Counter-Reformation, to extend it into the unstable mode of Relation; and, once again in this full-sense, the
"historical" baroque prefigured, in an astonishingly prophetic manner, present-day upheavals of the world.
79Concerning the Poem's Inforrnation
Sorne critical minds, more given to talk than to analysis, prodaim or prophesy the obsolescence of poetry as no longer
corresponding to the conditions of contemporary life and
somehow outmoded in relation to the violence and haste
abundant in modernity.l This traditional debate has been
going on ever since reason, in the Western sense, apparently
dissocÎated poetic creation (deemed useless in the city-state)
and scientific knowledge (strictly inscribed within the drama
of its own evolution). The question remains always the same,
in the same context: What's the use of poetry? Modern works
have already given their answer, frorn Rimbaud to Claudel or
Aimé Césaire: Poetry is not an amusement nor a display of
sentiments or beautiful things. It also imparts form to a
knowledge that could never be stricken byobsolescence.
Poets today, fascÎnated by the adventure of computers
[l'informatique], sense that here lies, if not the germ of a possible response to society's haranguing, at least a chance to
reconnect the two orders of knowledge, the poetic and the
scientific. Visible now, and approachable thanks to computers, scÎentific intention, putting in action the most obvious
workings of social responsibility, concretely alerts and questions the poet. For what information can the poem be
responsible? Can this information shoot through a computer's laser jets, sornething really more serious than the
game of skittles that Malherbe evoked years ago?
81The first observation, concerning the relationship between
poetry and computers, revolves around. an .ob:,ious dif~erence: the binary character of the latter. Bmanty IS not a SllTIpIe one-two rhythm, but n~ither .is. it a poetic mode, in ~very
instance inferring sometl1lng ongmal or revealed. ACClden t
that is not the result of chance is natural to poems, whereas it
is the consummate vice (the "virus") of any self-enclosed system, such as the computer.*
The poet's truth is also the desired truth of the other,
whereas, precisely, the truth of a computer system is closed
back upon its own sufficient Iogic. Moreover, every conclusion reached by such a system has been inscribed in the original data, whereas poetics open onto unpredictable and
unheard of things.
That is to say that exclusion is the rule in binary practice
(either/or), whereas poetics aims for the space of difference--not exclusion but, rather, where difference is realized
in going beyond.
The advent of computers has, nonetheless, thrown poetics
into reverse. By making speed comrnonplace.Just as romantic parallels or daring surrealist images now are displayed in
contemporary production of publicity "spots" and music
videos, the sudden flash, the poetics of the moment, has
become established and in sorne ways obliterated within the
unimaginable instantaneousness of the computer.
A" if in preparation for such a shock, three poetic works
have already been composed as systems: Mallarmé's Un coup
de dés jamais n'abolira le hasard (Dice Thrown Never Will
Annul Chance), Joyce 's lznnegan 's lVake, and Ezra Pound's
Cantos. In these works a poetics of duration, as full of revelations as the poetics of the moment, began once more to be
explored. Renounced first and foremost in Mallarmé's
search for the absolute, joyce's search for totality, and
*No matter how much cliversity therc is in the variables createcl within
such a system, it is always depenclent on information storecl in a
yes/no/ycs fUlm.
82Pound's search for multiplicity was Rimbaud's magnificent
daim concerning the sudden flash of revelation.
Every computer system, through its very instantaneity, makes
us familiar with unilingual revelation and renders the sudden
flash ordinary-but, from the viewpoint of a multilingual
scintillation, the aforementioned system is incapable of
"cornprehending."
Imagine a young man oblivious ta anything that is not his
rnachine; before it he is absolutely "deranged in his senses"
[déréglé des sens], a hoodlum afar and a saint at his desk, one
who has conquered the rnechanics ofvowels and consonants
and penetrated their color: a computer scientist but also
Rimbaud. The latter went after the most raging fulguration,
speed's sole music, and left roorn for the versions of patience
that Mallarmé stitched together, Joyce synthesized, and
Pound derived.
These poets had a prernonition: of a tremendous unknown
lying ahead of us, with its demand that the totality be conveyed, that is, finally, the speech of a11 peoples, the ring of
every language. The computer scientist will exclaim that his
machine, better than any other possible, sets us to thinking
of totality. But his is a totality deciphered through a game of
signs, a code totality. It evades the drama oflanguages.
(That the necessity for using computers today brings with
it writing's obituary has been sufficiently discussed. Maybe, in
fact, we will soon be the threatened disciples of a catacomb
religion, uniting in secret away from public prosecution and
punishment, to celebrate damned masses ofwriting, to comrnunicate by sharing texts otherwise impossible to find or
objectionable. Are computers the harbingers of such perdition?)
But the drarna does not simply boil down to a possible
deathblow for writing. Now the crisis of writing as a form of
expression meets the sudden burgeoning of oral languages.
Are we perhaps witnessing a transitional passage here? Yes-
83terday we distinguished benveen the oral and the written,
with the latter being transcendent. Maybe tomorrow we shaH
be living through a synthesis that could be summed up as the
written resolution, or transcription onto the page (which is
our screen), of an economy of orality. This is the passage
opening onto the archipelago of languages.
Oral forms of poetry are multiplying, giving rise to ceremonies, perfôrmances, and shows. AlI around the wodd-in
the Antilles, in the Arnericas, in Africa and A-;ia-poets of the
spoken word savor this turnaround, which mixes the jangling
brilliance of oral rhetoric into the alchemy of written words.
Poetic knowledge is no longer inseparable from writing;
momentary flashes verge on rhythmic amassings and the
monotonies of duration. The sparkle of many languages
utterly fulfills its function in such an encounter, in which the
lightning of poetry is recreated in time's gasp.
Triggered by a premonition of this encounter between the
oral and the written, many people have either a fascination
with computers or merely a curiosity to see them cough up
poetry. An introduction and invitation to binary speed for
the operator's lasting benefit. A roll of the dice endlessly
resumed. Systematics simultaneously stitched together, synthesized, and derived. But missing throughout will be the
vivid contrast among the languages of the world. Which constitutes the desiring flesh of a poem.
The computer, on the other hand, seems to be the privileged
instrument of someone wanting to "foIlow" any Whole whose
variants multiply vertiginously. It is useful for suggesting what
is stable within the unstable. Therefore, though it does not
create poetry, it can "show the way" to a poetics.
Even so, despite its high visibility, this machine is not the
place in which science and poetry might connect. This place
precedes any technique of application; it generates its space
within the indeterminacy ofaxioms.
84Poetic thought, before or after the accident of the poern,
or through it, attempts to set itself up in an axiomatic systern:
to knit something up whose stitches won't run. That creates
the opportunity for an infinite sort of conjunction, in which
science and poetry are equivalent. Here the axiom is a
grounding fantasy, even if it is then perpetuated through
conquests of ideas. This fantasy is privileged in not having to
be either elucidated or resorbed; the psychoanalysis of
knowledge is fixed on sornething else entirely. The poetic
axiom, like the mathematical axiom, is illuminating because
it is fragile and inescapable, obscure and revealing. In both
instances the prospective system accepts the accident and
grasps that in the future it will be transcended. Science transforms its languages; poetry invents its tongues. For neither is
it a question of exploring, but one, rather, of going toward a
totality that is unrealizable, without being required to say
where they will corne together-nor even that they have any
need to do so.
85III
PATHS
Out laud, ta mark the sPlitCREOLIZATIONS
~~
Creolization, one ofthe ways offorming a comPlex mix-and
not merely a linguistic result-is only exemPlified by its
processes and certainly not by the "contents" on which these
operate. This is where we depart from the concept of creoleness.
Though this notion covers (no more and no less) that which
accounts for creolizations, it goes on to propose two further
extensions. The first opens onto a broader ethnocultural
realm, from the Antilles to the lndian Ocean. But variations
ofthis sort do nol seem to be determiningfactors, because the
speed with which they change in Relation is so great. The
second is an attempt ta gel at Being. But that would constitute a step backward in comparison with how creolizations
can function. We propose neither humani~y 5 Being nor its
models. We are not prompted solely by the defining ofour
identities but by their relation to everything possible as wellthe mutual mutations generated by this interplay ofrelations.
Creolizations bring into Relation but not ta universalize; the
princiPles of creoleness regress toward negritudes, ideas of
Frenchness, ofLatinness, aU generalizing concepts~more or
less innocently.Dictate, Decree
Baroque derangement and the guarantee provided by scientific rigor: just yesterday these were the counterpoises of
our movement (our balan, our surge, our momentum)
toward totalité-monde. 1
But the baroque no longer constitutes a derangement,
since it has turned into a "natural" expression of whatever
scatters and cornes together. The age of classicisms (of deepening an internaI unity, raised to the dimensions of a universaI itself postulated) is past, no doubt, for aIl cultures. It
remains to make the network of their convergences work, or
to untangle it. It remains ta study those cultures that have not
had time, before coming into planetary contact (or conflict),
ta realize "their own" classicism. Are their powers not
impeded as they come to the meeting? Then again, what
shaH we say about composite cultures, whose composition
did not result from a union of "norms" but, rather, was buiIt
in the margins with aIl kinds of materials that by their very
nature were exceptions to the patience of the rule, ta be
thrust headlong into the world by necessity, oppression,
anguish, greed, or an appetite for adventure?
The baroque is the favored speech of these cultures, even
if henceforth it belongs to aIl. We calI it baroque, because we
know that confluences always partake of marginality, that
classicisms partake of intolerance, and that, for us, the substitute for the hidden violence of these intolerant exclusions is
the manifest and integrating violence of contaminations.
91Note that métissage exists in places where categories making their essences distinct were forrrlerly in opposition. The
more métissage became realized, the more the idea of it faded.
As the baroque became naturalized in the world, it tended to
become a commonplace, a generality (which is not the same
as a generalization), of a new regime. Because it proliferated
rather than deepened a norm, it is unable to consent to "classicisms." There is no culture rightfully impeded in the
baroque; none imposes its tradition, even if there are sorne
that export their generalizing products evef)T\vhere.
How can continuity (which is "desirable") be practiced in
this incessan t turnover? How can the stabilizing action of former classicisms be replaced? And with 'what?
At first our only recourse in the matter seemed to be the pos..
itivity of scientific method. This, for example, was the
method adopted for the defense and promotion of languages, corresponding to the ambition of linguistics to set
itself up as a science. A profitable pretense: despite its failure
to be confinned, it provided the basis for a system and gathered together its scattered materials. But science had ceased
having any desire to obtain this sort of guarantee, having,
meanwhile, ventured not outside the positive but beyond
positivism. It had come hce to face with the baroque and
understood that the work of the latter deserved cognizance.
The most recent developments of science invite us, therefore, to venture in our quest beyond the laws laid down by its
philosophies. For a long time we have divined both order
and disorder in the world and projected these as measure
and excess. But every poetics led us to believe something
that, of course, is not wrong: that excessiveness of order and
a measured disorder exist as weIl. The only discernibIe stabilities in Relation have to do with the interdependence of the
cycles operative there, how their corresponding patterns of
movement are in tune. In Relation analytic thought is led tü
construct unities whose interdependent variances jointly
92piece together the interactive totality. These unities are flot
models but revealing echos-monde. Thought makes music.
William Faulkner's work, Bob Marley's song, the theories of
Benoit Mandelbrot, are aIl échos-monde. Wilfredo Lam's painting (flowing together) or that of Roberto Matta (tearing
apart); the architecture of Chicago and just as easily the
shantytowns of Rio or Caracas; Ezra Pound's Cantos but also
the marching of schoolchildren in Soweto are échos-monde.
Finnegan 's Wake was an écho-monde that was prophetie and
consequentlyabsolute (without adrnission into the real).
Antonin Artaud's words constitute an écho-mondeoutside of
the world.
Whatever, coming from a tradition, enters into Relation;
whatever, defending a tradition, justifies Relation; whatever,
having left behind or refuted every tradition, provides the
basis for another full-sense to Relation; whatever, born of
Relation, contradicts and embodies it. Anglo-American pidgin (something, therefore, spoken neither by the English nor
by the Arnericans) is a negative écho-monde, whose concrete
force weaves the folds of Relation and neutralizes its subsistence.
The Creole language is a fragile and revealing écho-monde,
born of a reality of relation and limited within this reality by
its dependence.
Spoken languages, without exception, have become échosmonde, whose lack we are only just beginning to feel each
time one is wiped out by this circularity in evolution.
Echos-monde are not exacerbations that result directly from
the convulsive conditions of Relation. They are at work in the
matter of the world; they prophesy or illuminate it, divert it
or conversely gain strength within it.
In order to cope with or express confluences, every individual, every cornmunity, forms its own échos-monde, imagined
from power or vainglory, from suffering or impatience. Each
individual makes this sort of rnusic and each community as
93weIl. A" does the totality composed of individuals and communities.
Echos-monde thus allow us ta sense and cite the cultures of
peoples in the turbulent confluence whose globality organizes our chaos-monde. They pattern its constituent (not conclusive) elements and its expressions.
What we earlier remarked in Saint:John Perse as an aesthetics of the universe ("narration of the universe"), we now
describe in a different manner. It is an aesthetics of the chaosmonde.
The chaos-monde is only disorder if one assumes there to be
an order whose full force poetics is not prepared to reveal
(poetics is not a science). The ambition of poetics, rather, is
to safeguard the energy of this order. The aesthetics of the
universe assumed preestablished norms; the aesthetics of
chaos-monde is the impassioned illustration and refutation of
these. Chaos is not devoid of norms, but these neither constitute a goal nor govern a method there.
Chaos-monde is neither fusion nor confusion: it acknowledges neither the uniform blend-a ravenous integrationnor muddled nothingness. Chaos is not "chaotic."
But its hidden order does not presuppose hierarchies or
pre-cellencies-neither of chosen languages nor of princenations. The chaos-rnonde is not a mechanism; it has no keys.
The aesthetics of the chaos-monde (what we were thus calling
the aesthetics of the universe but cleared of a priori values)
embraces aIl the elements and forms of expression of this
totality within us; it is totality's act and its fluidity, totality's
reflection and agent in motion.
The baroque is the not-established outcome of this
motion.
Relation is that which simultaneously realizes and
expresses this motion. It is the chaos-monde relating (to itself).
The poetics of Relation (which is, therefore, part of the
aesthetics of the chaos-monde) senses, assumes, opens, gathers,
94scatters, continues, and transforms the thought of these elements, these fonns, and this motion.
Destructure these facts, declare them void, replace them,
reinvent their music: totality's imagination is inexhaustible
and always, in every form, wholly legitimate-that is, free of
alI legitirnacy.
An equilibrium and ability to endure are revived through
échos-monde. Individuals and communities go beyond vainglory or suffering, power or impatience, together-however
imperceptibly. The important thing is that such a process
represents an optimuln. Its results are unpredictable, but the
beginnings of the capacity to endure are detectible, coming
where formerly there were classicisrns. It is no longer
through deepening li tradition but through the tendency of
aIl traditions to enter into relation that this is achieved. Baroques serve to relay classicisms. Techniques of relation are
gradually substituted for techniques of the absolute, which
frequently were techniques of self-absolution. The arts of
expanse relate (dilate) the arts of depth.
These are the forrns we must use to contemplate the evolution of the Creole language: viewing it as a propagation of
the dialects that compose it, each extending toward the
other; but being aware also that this language can disappear,
or un-appear ifyou will, in one place or another.
We agree that the extinction of any language at aIl impoverishes everyone. And even more so, if that is possible, when
a composite language like Creole is in question, for this
would be an instant setback for the processes of bringinginto-relation. But how many languages, dialects, or idioms
will have vanished, eroded by the irnplacable consensus
among powers between profits and controls, before human
communities learn to preserve together their diversities. The
threat of this disappearance is one of the facts to be incorporated, as we earlier remarked, into the field of descriptive linguistics.
95Not every disappearance, however, is equivalent. The fact
that French-Ontarians are gradually ceasing to speak French
will not cause the latter to vanish from the world panorama.
Creole is not in the same situation because its elision in one
single region would rnake the areas of its survival even more
scarce. But establishing that these differences exist in no way
attenuates both the human drama unleashed each time it
happens and the extent of impoverishment then inflicted
upon the chaos-monde.
We are not going to save one language or another here or
there, while letting others perish. The floodtide of extinction, unstoppable in its power of contagion, ,vill win out. It
will leave a residue that is not one victorious language, or
several, but one or more desolate codes that will take a long
time to reconstitute the organic and unpredictable liveliness
of a language. Linguistic multiplicity protects ways of speaking, from the most extensive to the most fragile. It is in the
name of this total multiplicity and in function of it, rather
than of any selective pseudo-solidarities, that each language
must be defended.
An idiom like Creole, one so rapidly constituted in so fluid a
field of relations, cannot be analyzed the way, for exampIe, it
was done for Indo-European languages that aggregated
slowly around their roots. We need to know why this Creole
language was the only one to appear, why it took the same
forms in both the Caribbean basin and the Indian Ocean,
and why solely in countries colonized by the French; whereas
the other languages of this colonization process, English and
Spanish, remained inflexible as far as the colonized populations were concerned, their only concessions being pidgins
or other dialects that were derived.*
*Another language of the region that would be an exception to this statistical rllle is Papiamento, which has a Spanish lexical basis in countries
(Curaçao) that are no longer Spanish. It seems that, in this same region
of the Americas, more and more linguistic mier'ozones are being discovered in which Creoles, pidgins, and patois become undifferentiated.
96One possible response-in any case, the one l venture-is
that the French language, which we think of as so intent on
universality, was, of course, not like this at the time of the
conquest of the Americas, having perhaps not yet achieved its
normative unity. Breton and Norman dialects, the ones used
in Santo Domingo and the other islands, were less coercively
centripetal and thus able to enter into the cornposition of a
new language. English and Spanish were already perhaps
more "classic," and lent themselves less to this first amalgam
from which a language could have sprung. Of course, the
"unified" French language also spread throughout these territories with no language. The Creole compromise
(metaphorical and synthesizing), favored by Plantation structure, was the result of both the uprooting of Mrican languages and the deviance of French provincial idioms. The
origins of this compromise are already a marginality. It did,
indeed, name another reality, another mentality; but its
actual poetics-or construction-was what was deviant in
relation to any supposed classicism.
Traditionallinguistics, when applied to such a case, seeks
first and foremost (and counter to what the history of the language would indicate) to "classify" this language. That isand it is perfectly understandable-it attempts to endow it
with a body of rules and specifically stated standards ensuring
its ability to endure. But, though fixing usage and transcription are both indispensable, there still rernains a need to
devise (given rnarginality as a component of the language)
systems ofvariables, such as l earlier discussed, that would be
distinguished from a mere allocation of variants among the
dialects-of Haiti, Guadeloupe, or Guiana, etc.-of this Creole language. We would have a whole range of choices within
each dialect. Wherever etymology or phonetics faltered (and,
doubtless, etymology would be of less use in the matter) one
should let poetics take its course, that is, follow intuition
about both the history of the language and its development
in the mar'gins. In other words, the alleged scientific character can lapse into scholarly illusion, can conceal its strategem
97for "staying put." The standard of such a language formation
would be fluent. One could never legitimately have decreed
it.
The decisive element, as far as fixing language is concerned,
is the rule of usage; those who forge words frequently corne
up against it. And, in turn, this rule depends to a large extent
on the practical functioning of the language. But, in the environment we have outlined (combining échos-monde and
prevalent baroque), one could assume that the true basis for
an ability to endure is that the rule of usage have both
momentum and diffraction.
One can imagine language diasporas that would change so
rapidly within themselves and with such feedback, so many
turnarounds of norms (deviations and back and forth) that
their fixity would lie in that change. Their ability to endure
would not be accessible through deepening but through the
shimmer of variety. It would be a fluid equilibrium. This linguistic sparkle, 50 far removed from the mechanics of sabirs
and codes, is still inconceivable for us, but only because we
are paralyzed to this day by monolingual prejudice ("my language is my root").
The normative decr'ee, edict and instrument of this prejudice, prides itself, then, on the outmoded "guarantees" ofscientific positivism and tries to administer the evolution of
threatened languages, such as Creole, by attempting to "furnish" such a guarantee to the principle of identity (of permanence) that language implies. But it is not simply because the
Creole language is a component ofmy identity that l am worried about its possible disappearance; it is because the language would also be missing from the radiant sparkle, the
fluid equilibrium, and the ability to endure in disorder of the
chaos-monde. The way that l defend it must take this into
account.
Normative decrees have ceased to be the authoritative rule as
far as vehicular languages are concerned. EngIish and Span-
98ish, the most massive of these, and seemingly the best
entrenched in a sort of continental nature, met on the territory of the United States (Puerto Ricans, Chicanos, the irnmigrants in Florida). It may weIl be that their massiveness has
become fissured, that alongside the variances proliferating
Anglo-Arnerican, Iucky contaminations from the Spanish will
occur, and vice versa. This process will no doubt rnove more
quickly than any analysis one will be able to make of it.
Conternporary arguments over whether or not to simplify
the spelling of the French language demonstrate how rnany
contaminations have occurred there. These proposaIs are a
counter-decree, as futile as the purism they oppose is inoperative. Though the language must change in the world, and its
plurality must be confirmed, only dictions will bring this
about-not sorne authoritative edict.
We can only follow from afar the experimentation feeling
its way along in aIl the elsewheres that we dream of.* Is the
Chinese language absorbing the Latin alphabet? How is the
actual status of languages changing in the Soviet Union? Is
Quechuan beginning to rnake its escape from silence? And in
Europe are the Scandinavian languages starting to open up
to the world? Are forms of creolization silently at work, and
where? Will Swahili and Fulani share the written domain with
other languages in Africa? Are regional dialects in France
fading away? How quickly? Will ideograrns, pictograms, and
other fonns ofwriting show up in this panorama? Do translations already allow perceptible correspondences between
*It is not essential to note that archipelagic agglomerations of language
have formed everywhere. Either according to "roots" or farnilies: IndoEuropean languages, Latin languages, etc. Or according to their characteristic techniques of relation: composite languages, Creole languages, etc. Or according to both dimensions at once: vehicular
languages and their pidgins, aIl languages and their dialects, etc. It is
dangerous for the world's poetic diversity rnerely to link each of these
agglomerations to sorne politically self-interested project. What is
important is to track down the constants both within the agglornerations and within the majority of their confluences: Is there a hidden
order to contacts arnong languages?
99language systems? And how many minorities are there struggling within diglossia, Iike the numerous French-speaking
Creole blacks in southwestern Louisiana? Or the thirty thousand Inuits on Baffin Island? Lists of this sort are not innocent; they accustom the mind to apprehending problems in
a circular manner and to hatching solutions interdependently. Relating realms of knowledge (questions and solutions) with one another cannot be categorized as either a dis..
cipline or a science but, rather, as an imaginary construct of
reality that permits us to escape the pointillistic probability
approach without lapsing into abusive generalization.
The pronouncement of decrees in any case (issuing edicts
that constrict the future of the language) does not set you
free from collective anxieties. Game shows on television,
organized in every country equipped to do so, spotlight the
destabilization of languages in a spectacular manner. These
games are the same everywhere. One must reconstitute
words whose letters are either hidden or given in no order.
Meaning has little importance, and there have been cases in
which contestants have appeared on the shows after having
learned whole sections of dictionary. So one disjoints a language, taking into account, in short, only its skeleton (if one
can speak of the lexicon as a mere skeleton) to which one
clings.
The amusing character of these exercises, which faH
within the province of true performance, links them with
another sort of contest that is organized in France on a very
large scale and whose purpose is a much more elitist practice:
dictation. The dictation is diction doing its best. In it, of
course, it is a matter of conquering the difficulties of French
syntax and grammar, which, as everyone knows, are not simple.
Thus, a learning exercise, whose success depended on its
repetition day after day (we aIl remember the fateful dictation period in primary school), has turned into a show.
Where we had to learn, now we have to win. To prove there
100are people, beginning with the winners of these sparring
matches, who still are interested in the subtIeties-even the
most specious-of the language and who more often than
not master these.
These games seem to me a nostalgic exercise not devoid of
a strong tinge of collective anxiety.
Dictating, decreeing: both activities (in their secret complicity: a decree affixes laws to us, a dictation is from an edict now
essential) atternpt to form a dam against what makes languages fragile-contaminations, slovenIiness, barbarism.
But what you would caU barbarism is the inexhaustible
motion of the scintillations of languages, heaving dross and
inventions, dominations and accords, deathly silences and
irrepressible explosions, along with them. These languages
combine, vary, clash, so rapidly that the lengthy training of
earlier times is no longer worth much. Decreeing will have to
use dialects, devise systems of variables. Dictation, if it exists,
will have to transform itself into an exercise in creation, with
no obligation or penalty. Faults of syntax are, for the
moment, less decisive than fauIts of relation (though they
may be symptoms among others of the latter) and will take
less time to correct. On the other hand, let's admit to taking
a very personal pleasure in these rules when they improve the
quality of our expression. The only merit to correctness of
language lies in what this language says in the world: even
correctness is variable.
Baroque naturalities and the forms of chaos-monde have a
(desirable) ability to endure that a priori reasoning will not
unearth. It will not precede their work, the movement of
engagement (ascendency and surprise) from which, simultaneously, their matter and their full-sense arise. No topology
results from the échos-monde. But, on the other hand, the
baroque is notjust passion and mystery, nor does the guarantee of scientific rigor lapse in every instance into a dogma
secure in the positive. Baroque naturality, if it exists, has a
101structure or at least an arder, and we have ta invent a knowledge that would not serve to guarantee its norm in advance
but would fol1ow excessively along to keep up with the measurable quantity of its vertiginous variances.
102To Build the Tower
"Live in seclusion or open up to the other": this was supposedly the only alternative for any population demanding the
right to speak its own language. It is how inherited premises
of centuries-old dornination were given legitimacy. Either
you speak a language that is "universal," or on its way to being
so, and pal'ticipate in the life of the world; or else you retreat
into your particular idiom-quite unfit for sharing-in
which case you eut yourself off fl'orn the world to wallow
alone and sterile in your so-called identity.
However, as populations became liberated from legal (if
not actual) dependencies, the view emerged that it is the language of a community that controls the main vector of its cultural identity, which in turn determines the conditions of the
community's development. This viewpoint has been considered suspect and, more often than not, pernicious. During
this same period aIl developmental processes became
reduced to one exclusive type of perfection, that is, technological. Hence the puzzle: "Vhat is it that yOll are demanding
when a language, one single language, would provide you
with the key to progress?
Nations could have only one linguistic or cultural futureeither this seclusion within a restrictive particularity or, conversely, dilution within a generalizing universal. This is a formidable construction, and the "oral genius" of peoples of the
wodd urges us to burst our way out of it. The words of griots
and storytellers washed up on the edges of large cities, and
103eroded by second-rate fôrms of progress, stilI endure. GraduaIly, the governments ofpoor countries are coming to understand that there is no single, transcendent, and enforceable
model for development.
In this explosion of incredible diversity, linguistic relations
have become marked bl' creations springing from the friction between languages, bl' the give-and-take of sudden innovation (for example, initiatorl' street languages in southern
countries), and bl' masses of generally accepted notions as
weIl as passive prejudices.
The assumption that was, perhaps, most crucial concerned
the hierarchical division into written and oral languages. The
latter were crude, unsuited to conceptualization and the
acquisition of learning, incapable of guaranteeing the transmission of knowledge. The former were civilizing and
allowed man to transcend his natural state, inscribing him
both in permanence and in evolution.
It is true that literacy is a matter of utmost urgencl' in the
world and that, lacking other appropriate materials, this is
usually accomplished in what are called communication, or
vehicular, languages. But we have come to realize that aIl literaI literacl' needs to be buttressed bl' a culturalliteracl' that
opens up possibilities and allows the revival of autonomous
creative forces from within, and hence "inside," the language
under consideration. Development thus has linguistic stakes,
with consequences that can be neither codified nor pre~
dicted.
Relationships betvveen languages that were supposedll'
transcendent because written and others long kept at a level
referred to, with a hint of condescension, as "oral"-these
relationships 1 described of suddenness, unplanned adaptation, or sl'stematic apprenticeship-have been made even
more complex by both political and economic oppression.
The n:lationship of domination, consequentll', is the most blatant, gaining strength in technological expansion and generalizing a neutral uniformity. Dominated languages are thus
104pigeonholed as folklore or technical irresponsibility. At this
point a universallanguage, such as Esperanto, no matter how
weIl thought out, is not the rernedy. For any language that
does not create, that does not hoe its own tuff, subtracts
accordingly from the nongeneralizing universal.
The relationship of fascination has becorne, of course, less
and less virulent, but it drove intellectual elites of "developing countries" to the reverent usage of a language of prestige
that has only served them as self~impoverishment.
Relationships of multiplicity or contagion exist wherever mixtures explode into rnornentary flashes of creation, especially
in the languages of young people. Purists grow indignant,
and poets of Relation marvel at them. Linguistic borrowings
are only injurious when they turn passive because they sanction sorne domination.
Relationships of polite subservience or mockery come about
when frequent contact with tourist enclaves plays a substantial role, along with daily practices of subordination or
domestic service. This tendency to promote the appearance
of pidgins is swept aside by the politics of national education,
when these are weIl conceived and carried to completion.
RelationshiPs of tangency are by far the most insidious,
appearing whenever there are composite languages, languages of cornpromise between two or more idiorns-for
example, the Creoles of francophone regions in the Americas or the lndian Ocean. Then the erosion of the new language rnust be forestalled, as it is eaten away from within
through the mere weight of one of its components, which,
meanwhile, becomes reinforced as an agent of domination.
Relationships of subversion exist when an entire community
encourages sorne new and frequently antiestablishment
usage of a language. English-speaking Caribbeans and blacks
in the United States are two convincing examples in their use
of the English language, as are the Quebecois in their appropriation of French.
Relationships of intolerance are seen, for example, in the
teaching of a communication language. The language is
105estabI IS ' 1le.d OTlce and for al1 in its (original) history and
r ded as uncompromising toward those formidable conreg<tr .
ta~ions to whic~ spea~ers .or. crea.to.rs f~'om eIs~\~here are
Jike1y to subject IL An atavlstIC flLlH:hty 111 exerCls111g a lano'uabo'e is deemed indispensible to its perfection, resulting in
b
the opinion that theories concerning its learning and teaching can only be developed in the "country of origin."
Oppositions between the written and the oral do not date
fi"'om the recent past alone; they have long exercised their
divisions within a given language voice [langue], Arabic for
example, in which two separate orders of language use [langage] 1 for the community are designated: one learned and
the other popular.
This is the case fôr monolingual countries with "internaI"
problems, in which these two usages-oral and writtenintroduce ruptures (through social discrimination, which
deploys the rules of language usage). Other internaI problems are linked, sometimes to the erosion of regional diaIects
inscribed within the language, sometimes to the difficulty of
transcribing this language. This example provides a glimpse
of the inexhaustible variety of linguistic situations-something far more unsettling than the number of spoken languages in the world.
Monolingual countries with "externaI" problems would be
those in which a national language, the main form of communication, is threatened on an economic and culturallevel
by a foreign language.
In bilingual countries with internaI problems there are
two languages of wide communication that confront each
other; each one is assumed by one portion of the community,
which is destabilized in consequence.
In diglot countries one communication language tends to
dominate or restrict one or several "mother tongues," vernaculars or composite languages \vhose tradition is oralsornetimes to the point of extinction. The tasks of fixing and
transposing these languages then becomes criticaL As schol-
106ars take responsibility for them and everyone uses them,
these languages will doubtIess reinforce compromise solutions that will spread gradually according to systems of variables. One can expect the same urgent situation to apply to
languages whose writing is not phonetic, even when vigorously backed by national unanimity.
In multilingual countries with no apparent problems
there is a federative principle that tempers the relations
among the languages in usage, which are usually vehicular.
There are sorne multilingual countries, on the other hand,
in which the great number of rnother tongues makes choice
difficult, when it cornes to deciding which is the official or
national language.
AlI these situations intersect; they add up and thwart one
another and go far beyond any conflict solely between the
oral and the written. They are astounding indicators of the
relations among peoples and cultures. Their complexity prohibits any summary or reductive evaluation concerning the
strategies to be implemented. ln global relations languages
work, of course, in obedience to laws of economic and political domination but elude, nonetheless, any harsh and rigid
long-term forecast.
This same complexity is what allows us to come out of seclusion. We stop believing that we are alone in the sufferings of
our expression. We discover that it is the same for any number of other communities.* From that point on the idea
grows that speaking one's language and opening up to the
language of the other no longer form the basis for an alternative. "1 speak to you in your language voice, and it is in my
language use that 1 understand you." Creating in any given
language thus assumes that one be inhabited by the impossi-
*To our astonishment we also discover people comfortably established
within the placid body of their language, who cannot even comprehend that somewhere someone might experience an agony oflanguage
and who will tell you flat out, as they have in the United States, "That is
not a problem."
107bIe desire for aIl the languages in the world. TotaIity calls out
to us. Evely work of literature today is inspired by it. 2
The fact remains, nonetheless, that, when a people speaks
its language or languages, it is above aIl free to produce
through them at every level-free, that is, to make its relationship to the world concrete and visible for itself and for
others.
The defense of languages assuring Diversity is thus inseparable from restabilizing relations among communities. How
is it possible to come out of seclusion if only two or three languages continue to monopolize the irrefutable powers of
technology and their manipulation, which are imposed as
the sole path to salvation and energized by their actual
effects? This dominant behavior blocks the flowering of
imaginations, forbids one to be inspired by them, and
confines the general mentality within the limits of a bias for
technology as the only effective approach. The long-term
remedy for such losses is to spell out over and over again the
notion of an ethnotechnique, by means of which choices of
development would be adapted to the real needs of a community and to the protected landscape of its surroundings.
Nor is it certain that this will succeed, its prospects being very
chancy; but it is urgent that we take this route. The promotion of languages is the first axiom of this ethnotechnique.
And we know that, in the area of understanding, poetrywatch out for it!-has always been the consummate ethnotechnique. The defense of languages can come through
poetry (also).
Moreover, the tendency of aIl cultures to meet in a single,
identical perspective laid out by radio and television
unleashes yet unimagined possibilities for sharingand equality. It is not a sure thing that languages with an oral tradition
would start with a disadvantage in this encounter. Perhaps
more supple and adaptable, they would lend themselves to
change, aIl the more if the only other languages are those
with a written tradition, which have become stiffened and
108fixed over the centuries. Not long ago 1 learned of a project
in which a]apanese computer company was investing considerable sums of rnoney on a theoretical study of several
Mrican oral languages. Its intention was to explore the capacity of these languages to generate a new computer language
and to provide broad-based support for new systems. The primary goal of this research was, of course, to capture a potential market in the twenty-first century, and it was motivated by
competition from Anglo-Arnerican companies. Still, it should
be noted how the most self-interested technology was thereby
sanctioning not the (actual) liberation of the languages of
orality, of course, but already their right to be recognized.
On the other side of the bitter struggles against domination
and for the liberation of the imagination, there opens up a
multiply dispersed zone in which we are gripped by vertigo.
But this is not the vertigo preceding apocalypse and Babel's
faii. It is the shiver of a beginning, confronted with extreme
possibility. It is possible to build the Tower-in every language.
109Transparency and Opacity
There still exist centers of domination, but it is generally
acknowledged that there are no exclusive, lofty realms of
learning or metropolises of knowledge left standing. Henceforward, this knowledge, composed of abstract generality
and linked ta the spirit of conquest and discovery, has the
presence of human cultures in their solid materiality superimposed upon it. And knowledge, or at least the epistemology we produce for ourselves from it, has been changed by
this. Its transparency, in fact, its legitimacy is no longer based
on a Right.
Transparency no longer seems like the bottom of the mirror in which Western humanity reflected the world in its own
image. There is opacity now at the bottom of the mirror, a
whole alluvium deposited by populations, silt that is fertile
but, in actual fact, indistinct and unexplored even today,
denied or insulted more often than not, and with an insistent
presence that we are incapable of not experiencing.
The recent history of the French language corresponds
(and responds) to this trend. Because it lacks an anchor in
areas of concrete and undisguised domination-the AngloAmerican model-for sorne time now certain people have
apparently pledged the French language to establishing a
sort of serniconceptual dominance. It would thus maintain its
transparency and contain the increasing opacity of the world
within the limits of a well-phrased classicism, thereby perpetuating a lukewarm humanism, both colorless and reassuring.
IIIAlI languages have to be defended, and therefore French
(the language in which 1 create and, consequently, would not
like to see stereotyped) must also be defended-against this
sort of maladroit rearguard mission. Whether it is vehiculaI'
or not, a language that does not risk the disturbances arising
from contact among cultures, and not ardently involved in the
rcflections generated by an equal relation with other languages, seems to me doomed to real impoverishment. It is
true that the leveling effect of Anglo-Arnerican is a persistent
threat for everyone and that this language, in turn, risks being
transformed into a technical salesman's Esperanto, a perfunctory containerization of expression (neither Faulkner's nor
Hopkins's language but not the language of London pubs or
Bronx warehouses either). It is also true that the actual situation is that languages lacking the support of economic power
and the competitive politics that convey this are slowly disappearing. The result is that the languages of the worId, from
the most prestigious to the humblest, have ended up backing
the same demand, though general opinion has not yet caught
up. They demand a change in ways of thinking, a break with
the f~ltal trend to annihilate idioms, and they would grant to
every language, whether powerful or not, vehiculaI' or not, the
space and means to hold iL') own within the total accord. It
would be more beautiful to live in a symphony of languages
than in sorne reduced universal monolingualism-neutral
and standardized. There is one thing we can be sure of: a lingua franca (humanistic French, Anglo-American sabir, or
Esperanto code) is always apoetical.
In the indeterminate context of the French-speaking com,-
munities we lump together as la francophonie, it was, therefore, an apparently simple notion to regard the French language as the a priori bearer ofvalues that could help remedy
the anarchistic tendencies of the various cultures that are,
completely or partially, a product of its expression. La francophonie would be less what it claimed to be, an interdependent gathering of cultural convergences, than a sort of pre-
112ventive medicine against cultural disintegrations and diffusions that were considered unfortunate. This is one way, at
least, to analyze the discourse of a number of its early proponents.
According to this way of thinking, for example, the French
language has always been inseparable from a pursuit of the
dignity of maQ-kind, insofar as man is conceived of as an irreducible entity. From this one could infer that French would
thus make possible the lessening of certain angry resentments that are limiting and that have allegedly been
observed in quests for identity currently taking place in the
world. In a collective quest for identity-somehow now
labeled the quest for ethnicity-sterile extremes would exist
in which man, as an individual, would ris.k disappearing.
Because the French language vouches for the dignity of the
individual, the use of it would limit any such excesses on the
part of the colleetivity. In other words, this language would
have a humanizing function supposedly inseparable from its
very nature, which would serve as protection against the rash
actions of an excessive collectivization of identity. In the present conceptual debate the French language, the language of
the Rights of Man, would provide useful protection against
excesses set in motion by the presuppositions of any proclamation of the Rights of Peoples. La francoPhonie would provide that transcendency by giving the correct version of
humanism.
Another characteristic of the language would lie in its literary
dedication to clarity, a mission that has led to its reputation
for a pleasing rationality, which is, in fact, the guarantee of a
legitimate pleasure to be had in the manipulation of a unity
composed of consecutive, noncontradictory, concise statements.
The "essential" nature of literary language would preexist
any of the felicitous or infeIicitous accidents of its real,
diversified cultural usages. (This literary mission repeats certain tactical appr'oaches: the defense of languages is said to
113be inscribed in the nature of the French language as defined
here; it is a plural francopllOnie, or, as regards the Antilles and
Indian Ocean, the speaking of Creole within a French-speaking population.) Looked at this way, French would represent
notjust what is common in various ways to the linguistic practice of the populations constituting francophone culture, it
would also, in literature, or perhaps even in absolute terms,
be what is given in advance. From this it takes no time to
reach the conclusion that there is a "right" way to use the language. And the natural result will be scales of value to
appraise usage in the French-speaking realm.* Language
would reveal the differing degrees in this hierarchical organization.**
Neither its humanizing function, however (the famous
universality of French as the bearer of humanism), nor its
concordant predestination to be clear (its pleasurable rationality) stand up to examination. Languages have no mission.
This is, however, the sort of learnedly dealt nonsense we have
to struggle eternally against in a discourse depriving populations of cultural identity. An attentive observer will notice
that such windbags are anxiously intent on confining themselves to the f~11se transparency of a worId they used to run;
they do not want to enter into the penetrable opacity of a
world in which one exists, or agrees to exist, with and among
others. In the history of the language the claim that the conciseness of French is consecutive and noncontradictory is the
veil obscuring and justifying this refusaI. This is, in tact, a
rearguard mission.
*Alreadya distinction is made hetwecn [a jra!lro/J!wnit of the north. the
French spoken in France, Switzerland, Belgium, or Quebee; and {([(mneO/J!lOilil' of the south. evelything else.
**Specialists in francophone literaturcs do Ilot always resist "comparing" the writers from these countries. This objectifying practice negates
with one stroke the organic unity of Ollr literatures for the benefit of
the appreciation of the critic, who wOllld never dare apply such methods to the French literary corpus.
114Just as there is a right way to use the language, there would be
a "correct" way to teach it. This notion has repercussions not
just on the idea one has of the language but on the idea one
forms of its relationship with other languages. Consequently,
there are also repercussions on the theoretical apparatus set
in place by disciplines pertaining to language usage, whether
these are used to analyze languages or to translate from one
to the other or to make learning a language possible.
If, however, we look at literary texts, which after aIl best delineate the image of a language, if not its function, and if we
analyze how such texts are affected by language learning or
translation (these being the two fundamental mechanisms of
relational practice), ideas of transparency and opacity quite
naturally present themselves as the critical approach.
The literary text plays the contradictory role of a producer of
opacity.
Because the writer, entering the dense mass ofhis writings,
renounces an absolute, his poetic intention, full of self-evidence and sublimity. Writing's relation to that absolute is relative; that is, it actually renders it opaque by realizing it in
language. The text passes from a dreamed-of transparency to
the opacity produced in words.
Because the written text opposes anything that might lead
a reader to formulate the author's intention differently. At
the same time he can only guess at the shape of this intention. The reader goes, or rather tries to go back, from the
produced opacity to the transparency that he read into it.
Literary textuaI practice thus represents an opposition
between two opacities: the irreducible opacity of the text,
even when it is a matter of the lTlOst harmless sonnet, and the
always evolving opacity of the author or a reader. Sometimes
the latter becomes literally conscious of this opposition, in
which case he describes the text as "difficult."
Both learning a language and translation have in common
115the atternpt to give "sorne transparency" back to a text. That
is, they strive to bridge two series of opacities: in the case. of
language learning these would be the text and the nOVIce
reader confi"onting it, for whom any text is supposedly
difficult. In the case of translation the transparency rn ust provide a passage from a risky text to what is possible for another
text.
Preferably, the literary works one chooses for learning a
language are those best corresponding to what is assumed to
be the pattern of the language, not the "easiest" works but
ones supposedly having the least threatening opacity. This
was true of texts by Albert Camus given to foreign students in
France during the 1960s-a revealing instance of fundamental misinterpretation, since Camus's work only gave the
appearance of being clear and straightforward. Language
learning, whose main axiom was clari ty, skipped right over
the situational crisis that events in Algeria had formed in
Camus and the echoes of this in the tight, feverish, and
restrained structure of the style he had adopted to both
confide and withdraw at the same time.
When it is a question of using a language, therefore, we must
analyze the "situational competence" (to use an expression
of Patrick Charaudeau's) of this language. Charaudeau
showed how the preliminary stages oflanguage learning consist of bringing the student ta a state of "situational competence" in relation to the subject of the text he is tackIing.
Extending this notion [rom language learning ta usage, 1
think that there is a global situational competence that the
learner as weIl as the speaker or author needs to be aware of
and that it concerns not a given text but the language itself:
its situation within Relation, its precursors and its conceivable future. 1
SA we must reevaluate vehicular languages, that is, the
Western languages, which have spread practically everywhere in the world. Communities that are too "dense" to be
considered as the linguistic margins of their languages'
116countries of origin have adopted them in their diffusion.
The United States is not considered peripheral to Great
Britain (and neither is Australia or Canada); nor is Brazil
peripheral in relation to Portugal nor Argentina nor Mexico in relation to Spain. Among these vehiculaI' languages
only French seems to have spread everywhere without really
concentrating anywhere. French-speaking Belgium and
Quebec are threatened, the Maghreb becomes more and
more Arabic, the Mrican states and francophone countries
in the Caribbean do not carry sufficient weight, at least in
political and econornic terms. Moreover, as French spread,
it simultaneously strengthened the illusion that its place of
origin remained (even today) the privileged wOlnb and promoted the belief that this language had sorne kind of universaI value that had nothing whatsoever to do with the
areas into which it had actually spread. Consequently, the
situational competence of the language became overvalued
and at the same time "upheld" in its place of origin. A generalizing universal is always ethnocentric. This movement,
which is centripetal, is the opposite of the elernentary, brutal expansion of Anglo-American, which doesn't bother
itselfwith values or worry much about the future of the English language, as long as the sabir obtained in and through
this expansion works to maintain actual domination. Imperialism (the thought as weIl as the reality of empire) does
not conceive of anything universal but in every instance is a
substitute for it.
We can see another difference in the relationship, whether
rnanifest or latent, of these vehicular languages to the vernacular or cornposite or subversive languages with which
they have been in contact. Attempts have been made to
understand why, during European expansion in the
Caribbean, only French gave rise to compromise languages-the francophone Creoles-that get away from it and
at the same time remain dangerously close. Other languages
that spread into these regions permitted only pidgins or sub-
117versive practices inscribed within the language itself or distinctive features that only emphasized regional cultural characteristics, without, apparently, calling into question the
organic unicity of each of these vehiculaI' languages.* The
result of this is that Spanish, for instance, really became the
national language of Cubans and Colombians, with no spectacular problems or acknowledged conflicts. This did not
happen with French. The language underwent hu' greater
changes when it became Quebecois; it was not able to serve as
an unproblematic national language for the states of former
French-speaking Africa; nor-because of diglossia-could it
"naturally" be the language of inspiration tôr the people of
the Antilles or Réunion.**
Despite these differences in situation, one cannot help but
notice that, in varying degrees of complexity, there exist several English, Spanish, or French languages (not counting the
Anglo-American sabir that everybody readily uses). Whatever
the degree of complexity, the one thing hencéfurth outmoded is the principle (it~ not the l'eality) of a Ianguage's
intangible llnicity. Multiplicity Ja~s invaded vehicular languages and is an internaI part of them h'om now on, even
when·-like Spanish-they seem to resist any centrifugaI
movement. What does this multiplicity consist of? The
implicit renunciation of an arrogant, monolingual separateness and the temptation to participate in worIdwide entanglement.
We can deduce three reslllts of this: first, the bolstering of old
oral, vernacular, or composite languages, their fixing and
*What 1 call Creole here (and contrary, perhaps, to the Iules) is a language whose lexicon and syntax belong to twu heterogeneous linguistic
masses: Creole is Cl compromise. \Vhat l calI pidgin is a lexical and syntaetical refôrming within the mass of a single language, with an agg.ressive will tü dcformation, which is what distinguishes pidgin from a
dialect. Both practiccs are produets of an active creoli/atiol1.
**What 1 cali diglossia (an idea that made its appearance in linguistics,
though linguists say it doesn't work) is the domination of one language
over one or several others in the saIlle rcgion.
118transcription, will necessarily be subjected to the hazards of
this internaI complexity that is now part of the system of languages. It would be aimost futile and even dangerous to
defend these languages from a monolinguistic point of view,
because this would enclose them within an ideology and a
practice that are already outmoded. Next, any method of
learning or translation today has to take into account this
internaI multiplicity of languages, which goes even further
than the old divisions of dialects that were peculiar to each
language. Finally, and this observation is how the process
operates, the share of opacity allotted to each language,
whether vehicular or vernacular, dominating or dominated,
is vastly increased by this new multiplicity. The situational
competence of each of the languages of our world is overdetermined by the complexity of these l'elationships. The internaI multiplicity of languages here confirms the reality of multilingualism and corresponds to it organically. Our poetics
are overwhelmed by it.
It is, therefore, an anachronism, in applying teaching or
translation techniques, to teach the French language or to
translate into the French language. It is an epistemological
anachronism, by means of which people continue to consider as classic, hence eternal, something that apparently
does not "comprehend" opacity or tries to stand in the way of
it. Whatever the cl'aven pul'ist may say (and he has neither
Étiemble's arguments nor his force of conviction, hunting
down sabirs), there are several French languages today, and
languages allow us to conceive of their unicity according to a
new mode, in which French can no longer be monolingual.
If language is given in advance, if it claims to have a mission,
it misses out on the adventure and does not catch on in the
world.
The same is true for those languages that are currently struggling inside the folklore pigeonhole. Through fixation and
new methods of transcription they are trying to join into the
baroque chorus, the violent and cunningly extended fl'ame-
119work of our intertextuality. But because intertextuality is neither fusion nor confusion, ifit is to be fruitful and capable of
transcendence, the languages that end up involved in it must
first have been in charge of their own specificities. Consequently, it is aU the more urgent to carefully untangle
moments ofdiglossia. Ifone is in too much ofa hurry tojoin
the concert, there is a risk of mistaking as autonomous participation something that is only some disguised leftover of
former alienations. Opacities must be preserved; an appetite
for opportune obscurity in translation must be created; and
falsely convenient vehicular sabirs must be relentlessly
refuted. The ü"amework is not made oftransparency; and it is
not enough to assert one's right ta linguistic difference or,
conversely, to interlexicalit:y, to be sure of realizing them.
Ir would be worthwhile for someone who works with languages ta reverse the order of questions and begin his
approach by shedding light on the relations of languageculture-situation to the world. That is, by contemplating a
poetics. Otherwise, he runs the risk of turning in circles
within a code, whose fragile first stirrings he stubbornly
insists on legitimizing, to establish the illusion that it is scientific, doing so at the very point in this concert that languages would already have slipped away toward other, hTlitful
and unpredictable controversies.
120The Black Beach
The beach at Le Diamant on the southern coast of Martinique has a subterranean, cyclical life. During the rainy season, hivernage, it shrinks to a corridor of black sand that you
would almost think had corne from the siopes above, where
Mont Pelée branches out into foliage of quelled lava. As if the
sea kept alive sorne underground intercourse with the volcano's hidden fire. And 1 imagine those murky layers undulating along the sea floor, bringing to our airy regions a convoy of this substance of night and impassive ashes ripened by
the harshness of the north.
Then the beach is whipped by a wind not felt on the body;
it is a secret wind. High waves come in, lifting close to the
shore, they form less than ten meters out, the green of campeche trees, and in this short distance they unleash their
countless galaxies. Branches of manchineel and seagrape lie
about in havoc, writing in the more peaceful sunlight a memoir of the night sea's work. Brown seaweed piled there by the
invisible assault buries the line between sand and soil.
Uprooted coconut palrns have tumbled sideways like stricken
bodies. Along their trail, aIl the way to the rocky mound
marking the distant Morne Larcher, one can sense the power
of a hurricane one knows will come.
Just as one knows that in careme, the dry season, this
chaotic grandeur will be carried off, made evanescent by the
return of white sand and slack seas. The edge of the sea thus
represents the alternation (but one that is illegible) between
121order and chaos. The established municipalities do their best
to manage this constant movement between threatening
excess and dreamy fragility.
The movement of the beach, this rhythmic rhetoric of a
shore, do not seem to me gratuitous. They weave a circularity
that draws me in.
This is where 1 first saw a ghostly young man go by; his tireless vvandering traced a frontier between the land and water
as invisible as floodtide at night. l'rn not sure what he was
called, because he no longer answered to any given name.
One morning he started walking and began to pace up and
down the shore. He refused to speak and no longer admittecl
the possibility of any language. His mother became clesperate; his friencls tried in vain to break down the barrier of total
silence. He didn 't get angry; he didn 't smile; he would move
vaguely when a car missed him by a hair or threatened ta
knock him down. He walked, pulling the belt of his pants up
around his waist and wrapping it tighter as his body grew
thinner and thinner. It doesn 't feel right to have to represent
someone so rigorously adrift, sa 1 won 't try to describe him.
"Vhat 1wOllld like to show is the nature of this speechlessness.
AlI the languages of the world had come ta die here in the
quiet, tortured r~jection ofwhat was going on aIl around him
in this country: another constant downward drift yet one performed with an anxious satisfaction; the obtrusive sounds of
an excitement that is not sure of itself, the pursuit of a happiness that is Iimited ta shaky privileges, the imperceptible
numbing effect of quarrels taken to represent a m~jor battle.
AlI this he rejected, casting us out to the edges of his silence.
1 made an attempt to communicate with this absence. 1
respected his stubborn silence, but (frustrated by my inability
to make myself "understood" or accepted) wanted nonetheless to establish some system of relation with this walker that
was not based on words. Since he went back and fôrth with
the regularity of a metronome in front of the little garden
between our house and the beach, one day 1 called him
122silently. 1 didn't exactly know what sign to make-it had to be
something neither affected or condescending but also not
critical or distant. That time he didn't answer, but the second
or third time around (since without being insistent 1 was
insisting) he replied with a sign that was minute, at least to
my eyes; for this gesture was perhaps the utmost he was capable of expressing: "1 understand what you are attempting to
undertake. Vou are trying to find out why 1 walk like thisnot-here. 1 accept your trying. But look around and see ifit's
worth explaining. Are you, yourself, worth my explaining this
to you? So, let's leave it at that. We have gone as far as we can
together." l was inordinately proud to have gotten this
answer.
It was really a minute, imperceptible signal, sort of seesawing his barely lifted hand, and it became (because 1 adopted
it as weIl) our sign of complicity. It seemed to me that we were
perfecting this sign language, adding shades of aIl the possible meanings that chanced along. So until my departure we
shared scraps of the language of gesture that Jean:Jacques
Rousseau claimed preceded aIl spoken language.
l thought of the people struggling within this speck of the
world against silence and obliteration. And of how they-in
the obstinacy of their venture-have consented to being
reduced to sectarianism, stereotyped discourse, zeal, to convoy definitive truths, the appetite for power. And also ofwhat
Alain Gontrand has described so well as "our masquerades of
temperament." l thought about those people throughout the
rest of the world (and the l'est, moreover, is what is on the
move) who have not had the opportunity to take refuge, as
this walker has, in absence-having been forced out by raw
poverty, extortion, famines, or massacres. It is paradoxical
that,so many acts ofviolence everywhere produce language at
its most rudimentary, if not the extinction of words. Is there
no valid language for Chaos? Or does Chaos only produce a
sort of language that reduces and annihilates? Does its echo
recede into a sabir of sabirs at the level of a roar?
123The beach, however, has confinned its voIcanic nature. The
water now l'uns along the sea wall of rocks heaped there, a
souvenir of former hurricane damage, Beulah or David. The
black sand glistens under the foam like peeling skin. The
shoreline is cornered, up among coconut palms that now
stand in the sea, hailing with their foliage-so perfectIy
suited--the energy of the deep. We gauge the more and
more drastic shrinkage as the winter season strengthens.
Then, abruptIy, at least for those of us attentive to such
changes, the water subsides, daily creating a wider and wider
grayish strip. Don 't get the idea that this is a tide. But, still, it
is on the ebb! The beach, as it broadens, is the precursor of a
future coreme.
It seemed to me that the silent walker accelerated the
rhythm of his walks. And that exhilaration also infected the
surrounding country. At aIl costs we wanted to imitate the
motion we felt every\:vhere else, by synthesizing, agitating,
and speeding everything up (noise, speech, things to eat and
drink, zouc, automobiles). Forgetting oUl'selves any way possible in any kind of speed.
Then, in this circularity 1haunt, 1turned my efforts tmvard
seeing the beach's backwash into the nearby eddying void as
the equivalent of the circling of this man completely withdrawn into his motor forces; tried to relate them, and myself
as weIl, to this rhythm of the world that we consent to without
being able to measure or control its course. l thought how
everywhere, and in how many different modes, it is the same
necessity to fit into the chaotic drive of totality that is at work,
despite being subjected to the exaltations or numbing effects
of specific existences. 1 thought about these modes that are
just so many commonplaces: the fear, the wasting away, the
tortured extinction, the obstinate means of resistance, the
naive beIief, the famines that go unmentioned, the trepidation, the stubborn determination to learn, the imprisonments, the hopeless struggles, the withdrawal and isolation,
the arrogant powers, the blind wealth, the maintenance of
the status quo, the numbness, the hidden ideologies, the
124f1aunted ideologies, the crime, the whole mess, the ways of
being racist, the sIums, the sophisticated techniques, the sirnpIe games, the subtle garnes, the desertions and betrayals, the
unshrinking lives, the schools that work, the schools in ruin,
the power plots, the prizes for excellence, the children they
shoot, the computers, the classroorns with neither paper nor
pencils, the exacerbated starvation, the tracking of quarry,
the strokes of Iuck, the ghettos, the assimilations, the immigrations, the Earth's illnesses, the religions, the mind's illnesses, the musics of passion, the rages of what we so simply
callIibido, the pleasures of our urges and athletic pleasures,
and so many other infinite variations of life and death. That
these commonplaces, whose quantities are both countless
and precise, in fact produced this Roar, in which we could
still hear intoned every language in the world. Chaos has no
language but gives rise to quantifiable myriads of them. We
puzzle out the cycle of their conf1uences, the tempo of their
momentums, the similarities of their diversions.
The beach now undergoes tempestuous change. The sand is
the color of confusion, neither duB nor bright, and yet it suits
the quality of the atrnosphere and wind. The sea is unseasonably foamy: one feels that it will soon subdue the attacks on
shoaling rocks. It is haloed by f1ickering surfaces. As if this
reality (the sand, the sea trees, the vo1cano's conductive
water) organized its economy according to a cyclical plan,
buttressed by disorder. Those fantastic projects set up every
two years or so to save the country crossed rny mind: every
one of thern determined by notions of subjection and
inevitably destroyed, swallowed up by personal profit. l wondered whether, in little countries such as ours ("1 believe in
the future of little countries"), economic prospects (their
inspiration) ought not to be more like the beach at Le Diamant: cyclical, changeable, rnutating, running through an
economy of disorder whose detail would be meticulously calculated but whose comprehensive view would change rapidly
depending on different circumstances.
125vVhen, in tact, we list unmethodical1y some of the realms
demonstrating every level of economic development in a
country like this-the infrastructure and its maintainence,
the tenns ofinvestment, the budget of the state (what state?),
professional training, the search for prospects, enerf..,ry
sources (what sources?), unemployment, the will ta create,
Social Security coverage, taxes, union dialogue, the internaI
market, import-export, capital accumulation, the division of
the national product (of what nation?)--every single one is
in crisis, nonexistent, or impossible; not one has summoned
its inspiration from independent political power; furthermore, aIl are products of structural disorder inherited from
colonization, vvhich no aqjustment ofparity (between the former colony and the former home country) and, moreover,
no planning of an ideological order couId ever remedy.
That is what we have to shake off. To return ta the sources
of our cultures and the mobility of their relational content, in
arder ta have a better appreciation of this disorder and to
modulate every action according to it. To adapt action to the
various possibilities in turn: to the subsistence economy as it
existed on the Plantation fringes; to a market economy as the
contemporary world imposes it upon us; to a regional econorny, in arder to reunite with the reality of our Caribbean surroundings; and to a controlled economy whose forms have
been suggested by what we have learned from the sciences.
To forsake the single perspective of an economy whose
central mechanism is maximum subsidization, that has to be
obtained at the whim of an other. Obsession with these subsidies year after l'ear clots thought, parall'zes initiative, and
tends ta distribute the manna to the most exuberant, neglecting perhaps those who are the most effective.
An economy of disorder, which, 1 now recall, Marc Guillaume had turned into a completely different theory (l~lo~f
du désordre, Gallimard, 1978), but perhaps it is one that would
be akin to what Samir Amin said about autocentric
economies. Madness! was ml' first thought. Then-madness!
126they jeer. But this is madness made up of considerable possibilities of reflection for experts in the matter.
Here acceleration becomes the most important virtue. Not
the deliberately forgetful haste prevailing everywhere but an
intense acuteness of thought, quick to change its heading.
The capabiIity ofvarying speed and direction at any moment,
without, however, changing its nature, its intention, or its
will, might be perhaps the optimal principle for such an economic systern. Course changes would be dependent on a
harsh analysis of reality. As for steadfastness of intention and
will, this we would forge as we come to know our cultures.
This acceleration and speed race across the Earth. "And yet,
it does turn!" GaIileo's aside did not simply determine a new
order in our knowledge of the stars; it prophesied the circularity of languages, the convergent speed of cultures, the
autonomy (in relation to any dogma) of the resultant energy.
But, while 1 was wandering like this, a silence as dizzying as
speed and disorder gradually rose from the uproar of the sea.
The voiceless man who walks keeps on carting his black
sand from a distant volcano known only to himself, to the
beaches he pretends to share with us. How can he run faster
when he is growing so desperately thin? One of us whispers:
"He goes faster and faster because if he stops, if he slows
down-he will faIl."
We are not going any faster, we are aIl hurtling onwardfor fear of falIing.
127IV
THEORIES
Theory is absence, obscure and propitiousRELATION
~~
The repercussions ofcultures, whetheT in symbiosis or in
conflict-in a polka, we might say, or in a laghia-in
domination or liberation, opening b(if'ore us an unknown
frJTever both near and deferred, their lines of/oree occasionally
divined, only to vanish instantly. Leaving us to imagine their
interaction and shape it at the same time: to dream or to act.
The deconstruction of any ideal relationship one might
daim to define in this interaction, out of which ghouls
of totalitarian thinking might suddenly reemf:rge.
The position ofeach part within this whole: that is, the
acknowledged validÜy of each specifie Plantation yet at the
same time the urgent need to understand the hidden order of
the whole-so as to wander there without becoming lost.
lize thing recused in every generalization of an absolute, even
and especially some absolute secreted within this imaginary
construct ofRelation: that is, the possibility for each one at
every moment to be both solidary and solitary there.The Relative and Chaos
We were circling around the thought of Chaos, sensing that
the way Chaos itself goes around is the opposite of what is
ordinarily understood by "chaotic" and that it opens onto a
new phenomenon: Relation, or totality in evolution, whose
order is continually in flux and whose disorder one can imagine forever.
There is a revealing correspondence between the philosophies secreted by the sciences in the West and the conceptions cornmonly held about or imposed upon cultures and
their relations. During the period when positivism was triumphant, culture (and not yet cultures) was conceived of as
monolithic, culture existing wherever the refinements of civilization have led to humanism.* When conceived of in this
manner, culture is presented as purely abstract, the very
essence of this movement toward an ideal. Those who attain
it are responsible for this evolution and its pilots. They teach
the rest of the world. Montaigne's relativism is forgotten,
shoved through a trapdoor and stifled for more than three
centuries. It required the illustration of the notion of the relative in the scientific theory of Relativity for an awareness of
the relativisrn of cultures to prevail. l
What we commonly grasp of Einsteinian thought is this
*Positivism and humanism have in common the fact that both end up
imposing the reality of an "ideal object" that they have initially defined
as value.
133simple connection between Relativity and the principle of
the relative. AIl the l'est lies in ambush within the bastion of
theorems. Substituting or compensating for its lack of direct
access to \vhat Einstein said, the public bas mythologized the
scientist. This mythrnaking is a sign of the extent to which the
relative is powerfully present for us. To the point at which the
formula E = mc2 has becorne a common place (or commonplace)2 that we use advisedly, that is for its sl'mbolic freight,
without being sure we really appreciate its content.
"Vhat part of this theory do we retain concerning the subject at hand, when vve are not lirnited bl' our infirrnities as
nonspecialist'i? That there is no thought of the absolute but
also that the Relation of uncertainty postulated by Heisenberg is not perhaps the basis for an irreversible probabilism.
(Are "prirnary" particles subjected to chance?) For Einstein
Relativity is not purely relative. The universe has a "sense"
that is neither chance Bor necessity: a georneter god (the
sarne as Newton's), in any case a "powerful and rnysterious
reason"-and not, therefore, a rnalicious spirit, as in
Descartes-provides us with a riddle to decipher. This puzzle
(something to be divined through intuition and verified
through experirnentation) "guarantees" the interactive
dynarnics of the universe and of our knowledge of it.
Experimental thought has its basis in this interaction and
"guarantees" in turn that the puzzle will not be taken into
l'eaIrns of the impossible (something will always be there to
grasp) nor into realms of the absolute (something will always
remain to be grasped).
The totality within which Relativity is exerted and to which
it is applied, through the workings of the mind, is not totalitarian, therefore: not imposed a priori, not flxed as an
absolute. And, consequently, for the mind, it is neither a
restrictive dogmatism nor the skepticisrn of pl'obabilist
thought.
Consent to cultural relativisrn ("each hurnan culture has
value in its own milieu, becoming equivalent to everl' other in
the ensemble") accompanied the spreading awareness of,
134and adherence or at least habituation to, the idea of Relativity.
This cultural relativism has not always come without a
tinge of essentialism, which has colored even the concepts
that contributed to challenging the domination of conquering cultures. The idea of one Africa, conceived of as undivided, and the theory of Negritude (among French speakers)
are two examples of this frequently debated for that very reason.
Furthermore, this relativism in turn has been regarded as
falling into the category of a "golden mean." Here diversity
exists among cultures but does not prevent the formation of
hierarchies among civilizations. Or, at the very least, an
ascent (regular or intermittent) tmvard the transparency of a
world-or model- that is universal. And, consequently, for
the mind there is neither totalitarian ethnocentrism nor the
anarchy of a tabula rasa. Montaigne's invaluable idea was
adapted to suit the tendentious drone of this new version of
humanism. This form of relativism has no pertinence to the
relative.
Just as Relativity in the end postulated a Harmony to the
universe, cultural relativism (Relativity's timid and faltering
reflection) viewed and organized the world through a global
transparency that was, in the last analysis, reductive. This cultural "Society of Nations" could not withstand the maelstrom.
But the dogmatic feeling of superiority and the clever
maneuvers of false relativism were succeeded by an elegant
disenchantment, the acute sense of the futility of it aIl. If
everything in this maelstrom was equal in fact to everything
else, if the realization of an Earth-totality opened onto
chaos-what was the use? Pervading what should have been
an exhilarating arrivaI at totality was a flavor of declining
empire, reinforced, perhaps, after World War II by the antagonistic presence of the two Roman empires of our time, the
United States and the Soviet Union. Both were driven by the
same naive belief, frequently confirmed by reality, in their
preeminence over other populations. And you might imag-
135ine each of these powers, which, having plentifuI wealth, did
not have to torment themselves so, going around muttering
ta themselves, "Tonight Lucullus will be eating at Lucullus's
table."
Meanwhile, poor nations, by their very eruption, had
made it possible for new ideas to be born: ideas of otherness,
of difference, of minority rights, of the rights of peoples.
These ideas, however, seemed only to dust the surface of the
swirling magma. It was not clear how anyone could conceive
of the global dereliction of humanities meeting and confronting one another in the spaces and times of the planet.
Then, bit by bit, an idea came together from scientific
intuitions: it was possible to study Chaos without succumbing
to a vertigo of disillusion over its endless transformations.
Let us venture two of the directions in which the strengths of
science either operate or become exasperated.
First, there is the directly technological application, which
tends to reactivate a "pro.jective linearity" and sets things up,
if not for getting to "the bottom" of the matter (possibly
something it will never achieve), at least for discovery or conquest, which are one and the same, of the galactic spaces.
Technological thought is clear about the fact that it will never
exhaust the yield of the universe but doesn 't let this scare it
oil. On the contrary, it is stymied by the mystery of the
infinitely small (of the "prime element"), dreading the discovery there of an infinitely receding limit.
The Unified Field Theory constructed by Einstein
attempted to bridge these two dimensions of the universe
and define its undifferentiated unity. But, for the time being,
"dominant" scientific thought has apparently renounced
either supporting or delving into this theory. It seems, rather,
to have returned to the comfortable empiricism that provides
immense technological power, having decided ta devote
itself principally to "exploration," and preferably in the
realm of the infinitely large.
This tendency, morever, has become increasingly based on
136attempts to imagine or to prove a "creation of the world" (the
Big Bang), which has always been the "basis" of the scientific
project. The old obsession with filiation carves out a new
adornment for itself. Linearity ties in. The idea of God is
there. And the notion of legitimacy reemerges. A science of
conquerors who scorn or fear limits; a science of conquest.
The other direction, which is not one, distances itself
entirely from the thought of conquest; it is an experimental
meditation (a follow-through) of the process of relation, at
work in reality, among the elements (whether primary or
not) that weave its combinations. A science of inquiry. This
"orientation" then leads to following through whatever is
dynamic, the relational, the chaotic-anything fluid and various and moreover uncertain (that is, ungraspable) yet fundamental in every instance and quite likely full ofinstances of
invariance.
It is true that each of these two tendencies relays and reinforces each othec But the first perpetuates an arrowlike projection, whereas the second, perhaps, recreates the processes
of circular nomadism. It is also true that dispossessed
regions, countries in the throes of absolute poverty, are isolated from participation. But, though they don't "count" for
conquering science (except as a ruthless reserve of prirnary
material), their presence constitutes another material, the
one covered by inquiring science. The subject matter of this
science is chaos-monde, one of the modes of Chaos.
This is not a passive participation. Passivity plays no part in
Relation. Every tirne an individual or community attempts to
define its place in it, even if this place is disputed, it helps
blow the usual way of thinking off course, driving out the now
weary rules of former classicisms, making new "followthroughs" to chaos-monde possible.
The science of Chaos renounces linearity's potent grip
and, in this expanse/extension, conceives of indeterminacy
as a fact that can be analyzed and accident as measurable. By
rediscovering the abysses ofart or the interplay ofvarious aes-
137thetics, scientific knowlcdge thus develops one of the ways
poetics is expressed, reconnecting with poetry's earlier ambition to establish itself as knowledge.
One can see why philosophies issuing from differen t
"stages" of science have driven successively "established"
ideas of cultures and their entanglements. It is because scientific ideas always presuppose generalization (unconsciously influenced by the metaphysics fl'om which they freed
themselves) and are suspicious of it in each instance (as every
poetics in the world inspires us to be). They have finally been
able to understand generalization from the angle of generality, abandoning filiation's linearity tôr the surplus of expans1veness. This 15 how the evolution of cultures works.
In expanse/extension the forms of chaos-mondf' (the
immeasurable intermixing of cultures) are unfôreseeable
and fôretellablc. We have not yet begun to calculate their
consequences: the passive adoptions, irrevocable rejections,
naive beliefs, parallellives, and the many forms of confrontation or consent, the many syntheses, surpassings, or returns,
the many sudden outbursts of invention, born of impacts and
breaking what has produced them, which compose the fluid,
turbulent, stubborn, and possibly organized matter of our
common destiny.
Is it meaningful, pathetic, or ridiculous that Chinese students have been massacred in front of a cardboarcl reproduction of the Statue of Liberty? Or that, in a Rmnanian
house, hatecl portraits of Ceau~escu have been replacecl bl'
photographs cut fi'om magazines of characters in the television series "Dallas"? Sim ply to ask the question is to imagine
the unimaginable turbulence of Relation.
Yes, we are just barell' beginning to conceive of this
immense friction. The more it works in favor of an oppressive
order, the more it caUs forth disorder as well. The more it
produces exclusion, the more it generates attraction. It standardizes-but at every node of Relation we will And callouses
of resistance. Relation is learning more and more to go
beyond judgments into the unexpected clark of art's upsurg-
138ings. Its beauty springs from the stable and the unstable,
from the deviance of many particular poetics and the clairvoyance of a relational poetics. The more things it standardizes into a state of lethargy, the more rebellious consciousness it arouses.
We wil1 not gain access to this turbulence through the sanIe
means employed by theoreticians and students of Chaos. We
do not have at our disposaI computers capable of following
the flow of cultures, the poetic nodes, the dynamics of languages, the phases of cultures in confrontation. Should we
hope that our imaginary construct of Relation might someday be "confirmed" in formulas we can read on the monitor
screen? Can accident, which is the joy of poetics, be tamed
through circuits? Might it be possible to relate the turbulences of chaos-monde in this way (in and through analysis by
instruments) to the turbulences of Chaos? Then what would
be the consequences of such an intrusion?
Every "virus" (every accident), according to Jacques Coursil, is injected into a computer system; but it would also be
possible for it to have been secreted by the system itse1f. In
this case it would be proof that the system "thinks," that, in
short, accident is part of its nature. This outcome would also
be invaluable for safeguarding freedoms, the guarantee that
no Law could ever be founded on such a system. What's
more, taking a wild tack with this hypothesis, the virus would
manifest the fractal nature of the system; it would be the sign
of the intrusion of Chaos, the irremediable indicator, that is,
of the asynchronous nature of the system. This is how one
might imagine this other unimaginable event: the computer,
the privileged instrument for the analysis of Chaos, would be
invaded and inhabited by the latter. Chaos, turning back
around upon itself, would shut the doors. It would be God.
(At least, if no one invented other instruments of investigation that could not be contarninated by their object.) The
stubborn determination ofanalytic thought makes it possible
to continue infinitely this perspective of deferral. Really, how-
139ever, it is only the human imaginary that cannot be contaminated by its o~jects. Because it alone diversifies them
infinitely yet brings them back, nonetheless, to a füll burst of
unity. The highest point of knowledge is always a poetics.
140Distancing, Determining
Contemporary violence is the response societies make to the
immediacy of contacts and is exacerbated by the brutality of
the flash agents of Communication. 1 It is not aIl that easy to
forego the comfortable expanses of time formerly allowing
changes to occur imperceptibly. In cities this speed becomes
concentrated, and the response explodes. These same mechanisms are at work both in cultures of intervention and in
emerging cultures: New York or Lagos.* In the shantytowns
and ghettos of even the smaIlest cities the same gears engage:
the violence of poverty and mud but also an unconscious and
desperate rage at not "grasping" [com-prendre] the chaos of
the world. Those who dominate benefit from the chaos;
those who are oppressed are exasperated by it.
This speeding up of relationships has repercussions on
how the full-sense of identity is understood. The latter is no
longer linked, except in an occasionally anachronistic or
more often lethal manner, to the sacred mystery of the root.
It depends on how a society participates in global relation,
registers its speed, and controis its conveyance or doesn't.
Identity is no longer just permanence; it is a capacity for variation, yes, a variable-either under control or wildly fluctuating.
The old idea of identity as root, whenever it proves hard to
*The cultures that l caU "emerging" are those that do not have at their
disposaI the institutionalized-nor, for that matter, improvised-means
of speaking up in the planetary flow of Communication.
141define or impossible to maintain, leads inexorably to the
refuges of generalization provided by the universal as value.
This is how the elite populations in southern countrics have
usually reacted when choosing to renounce their own
difficult dennition. A generalizing universal l'eassures them.
Ickntity as a system of relation, as an aptitude fur "givingon-and-\vith" [donner-avec], is, in contrast, a form of violence
that challenges the generalizing universal and necessitates
cven more stringent clcrnands for specificity. But it is hard to
kcep in balance.* "\Thy is there this paradox in Relation? \Vhy
the neccssity to approach the specificities of communities as
closely as possible? To cut clown on the danger of bcing
boggecl clown, clilutecl, or "arrestecl" in unditferentiated conglomerations.
But, in any case, the speecl with which geocultural entitics,
aggregates f()l'med through cncounters and kinships, change
in the world is relative. For example, there is a real situational
community among the creolizing cultures of the Caribbean
and thosc of the lndian Ocean (in Réunion or Seychelles).
Hovvever, therc is nothing to say that accelerated evolution
willnot soon entail equally powerful and decisive encounters
between the Caribbean region and Brazil, or among the
smaller Antillean islands (both French- and English-speaking), that wiIllead to the formation of new zones of relational
community. It would not be possible to base ontological
thinking on the existence ofentities such as these, whose very
nature is to vary tremendously within Relation. This variation
is, on the contrary, evidencc that ontological thought no
longer "{ünctions," no longer provides a founding certainty
that is stock-still, once and for aIl, in a restrictive territory.
In such an evolution vve are justified in maintaining the
f()llowing principle: "Relation exists, especially as the particuJars that are its interdependent constituent have first fl'eecl
themselvcs hom any approximation of depenclency."
*There is a growing tendeney in \Vestcrn aesthctie theorics. IJOm
ethnopoctics Lo gcopoctics to cosmopoetics, to makc sorne daim of
going bc:'ond notions or dimensions of identity,
142GraduaIly, premonitions of the interdependence at work
in the world today have replaced the ideologies of national
independence that drove the struggles for decolonization.
But the absolute presupposition of this interdependence is
that instances of independence will be defined as closely as
possible and actually won or sustained. Because it is only
beneficial to aIl (it only stops being a pretext or ruse) at the
point at which it governs the distancings that are determinant.
One of the most dramatic consequences of interdependence concerns the hazards of emigration. "\Then identity is
determined by a root, the emigrant is condemned (especially
in the second generation) to being split and flattened. Usually an outcast in the place he has newly set anchor, he is
forced into impossible attempts to reconcile his former and
his present belonging.
Despite their French citizenship, most of the Antilleans
who live in France, participating in the widespreadmovement of emigration into this country (North Mricans, Portuguese, Senegalese, etc.), have not been spared this condition. It is through a rather impressive turnabout in history, in
Martinique, that its leaders are now speaking up to suggest
that it would not, after aIl, be such a bad thing to participate
in a dignified manner in this citizenship.
Summarizing what we know concerning the varieties of identity, we arrive at the following:
Root identity
-is founded in the distant past in a vision, a rnyth of the
creation of the world;
-is sanctified by the hidden violence of a filiation that
strictly follows from this founding episode;
-is ratified bya daim to legitimacy that allows a community to prodaim its entitlement to the possession of a
land, which thus becornes a territory;
-is preserved by being projected onto other territories,
143making theiI' conquest legitimate-and through the
project of a discursive knowledge.
Root identity therefore rooted the thought of self and of
territory and set in motion the thought of the other and of
voyage.
Relation identi~y
-is linked not to a creation of the world but to the con-,
scious and contradictory experience of contacts among
cultures;
-is produced in the chaotic network of Relation and not
in the hidden violence of filiation;
-does not devise any legitimacy as its guarantee of entitlement, but circulates, newly extended;
-cioes not think of a land as a territory from which to
project tmvard other territories but as a place where
one gives-on-and-with rather than grasps.
Relation identity exults the thought of errantry and of
totality.
The shock of relating, hence, has repercussions on several
levels. When secular cultures come into contact through
their intolerances, the ensuing violence triggers mutual
exclusions that are of a sacred nature and, for which any
future reconciliation is hard to foresee. When a culture that
is expressly composite, such as the culture of Martinique, is
touched by another (French) that "entered into" its compo-'
sition and continues to determine it, not radically but
through the erosion of assimilation, the violence of reaction
is intermittent and unsure of itself. For the Martinican it has
no solid rootstock in any sacred territory or filiation. This,
indeed, is a case in which specificity is a strict requirement
and must be defined as closely as possible. For this composite
culture is fragile in the extreme, wearing down through contact with a masked colonization.
Consequently, wouldn 't it be best just to go along \vith it?
Wouldn't it be a viable solution to embellish the alienation,
144to endure while comfortably receiving state assistance, with
aIl the obvious guarantees implied in such a decision? This is
what the technocratie elite, created for the management of
decoy positions, have to talk themselves into before they convince the people of Martinique. Their task is aIl the less
difficult since they use it to give themselves airs of conciliation, of cooperative humanism, of a realism anxious to make
concrete improvements in circumstances. Not counting the
pleasures of permissive consumption. Not counting the
actual advantages of a special position, in which public funds
(from France or Europe) serve to satisfy a rather large number of people (to the benefit, however, of French or European companies that are more and more visible in the country or castes of békés converted from former planters into a
tertiary sector and thus won over to the ideas of this elite)
and serve to foster the hopes ofan even greater number.*
And it is true that in a context of this sort one spares oneselfboth the sacred violence, which is boundless, and the violence of absolute destitution, which is spreading with such
lightning speed over half the planet. What rernains here is
only the suppressed and intermittent violence of a community convulsively demonstrating its sense of disquiet. What
sense of disquiet? The one that cornes from having to consume the world without participating in it, without even the
least idea of it, without being able to offer it anything other
than a vague homily to a generalizing universal. Privileged
disquiet.
Traumatic reaction is not, however, the only form of resistance in Martinique. In a nonatavistic society of this sort
three rallying points have grown in strength: relationship
with the natural surroundings, the Caribbean; defense of the
*This year (1990) Martinique, which is an underdeveloped country
with 40 percent unemployment, consumed 1.3 tons of Jr'anian caviar
(imported from France) and forty million francs' worth of champagne;
there are 173,000 cars registered for its 320,000 inhabitants. As the television newscaster, in a felicitous commentary on these figures, said,
"We'll do better next year!"
145people's language, Creole; protection of the land, by mobilizing everyone. Three modes of existence that challenge the
establishment (three cultural reflexes that are not without
ambiguity thcmsclves), that do not link, however, the severe
demand for specificity to the intolerance of a root but,
rather, to an ecological vision of Relation.
Ecology, going above and beyond its concerns with what we
calI the environment, seems to us to represent mankind's
drive to extend to the planet Earth the former sacred
thought of Terri tory. Thus, it has a double orientation: either
it can be conceived of as a by-product of this sacred and in
this case he experienced as mysticisrn, or else this extending
thought will bear the germ of criticism of territorial thought
(ofits sacredness and exc1usiveness), so that ecologywilI then
act as politics.
The politics of ecology has implications for populations
that are decirnated or threatened with disappearance as a
people. For, far trom consenting to sacred intolerance, it is a
driving force for the relational interdependence of aIl lands,
of the whole Earth. 1t is this very interdependence that forms
the basis for entitlement. Other factors become null and
void.
Concerning the Antilles, for example, there is a lot of discussion concerning the legitimacy of land "possession."
According to the mysterious laws of rootedness (of filiation),
the only "possessors" of the Archipelago would be the Caribs
or their predecessors, who have been exterrninated. The
restrictive force of the sacred always tends to seek out the first
occupan ts of a territory (those closest to an original "creation"). So, in the Cal'ibbean would this be Caribs and
Arawaks or other older and, consequently, more legitimate
and "determining" populations? The massacre of the Indians, uprooting the sacred, has already invalidated this futile
search. Once that had happened, Antillean soil couIcl not
becomc a territory but, rather, a rhizomeclland. lndeed, Mar··
tinican soil does not belong as a rooted absolute either to the
146descendants of deported Africans or to the békés or to the
Hindus or to the mulattoes. But the consequences of European expansion (extermination of the Pre-Columbians,
importation of new populations) is precisely what forms the
basis for a new relationship with the land: not the absolute
ontological possession regarded as sacred but the complicity
of relation. Those who have endured the land's constraint,
who are perhaps mistrustful of it, who have perhaps
attempted to escape it to forget their slavery, have also begun
to foster these new connections with it, in which the sacred
intolerance of the root, with its sectarian exclusiveness, bas
no longer any share.
Ecological mysticism relies on this intolerance. A reactionary, that is to say infertile, way of thinking about the
Earth, it would almost be akin to the "return to the land"
championed by Pétain, whose only instinct was to reactivate
the forces of tradition and abdication while at the same time
appealing to a withdrawal reflex.
In Western countries these two ecological options (political and mystical) corne together in action. Still, one cannot
ignore the differences that drive them. Not acknowledging
these differences in our countries predisposes us in favor of
mimetic practices that are either quite simply imported
because of the pressures of Western opinion or else the baggage of standardized fashion, such as jogging and hiking.
We end up every time with the following axiorn-one not
given in advance: Pronouncing one's specificity is not
enough if one is to escape the lethal, indistinct confusion of
assimilations; this specificity still has to be put into action
before consenting to any outcome.
But the axiom, though not a priori, is unbending when
applied. A perilous equilibrium exists between self~knowledge and another's practice. If we are to renounce intolerances, why hold out against outright consent? And, if we are
to follow our freedom to its "logical consequences," why not
have the right to confirm it in a radical negation of the
Other?
147These dilemmas have their own particular areas of application ta govern. Such as the need for pOOl' countries ta exercise self:·sufficiency that is economically and physically sustaining. Such as the definition ofhow forms ofindependence
are experienced or hoped for. Such as the putting into practice of ethnotechnology as an instrument of self-sufficiency.
Never have obligations been so chancy in reality.
To oppose the disturbing affective standardization of peopIes, whose affect has been diverted by the processes and
products of international exchange, either consented to or
imposed, it is necessary to renew the visions and aesthetics of
relating to the earth.
But, since sensibilities have already been diverted widely
by these processes of exchange, it will not be easy to get anyone to replace products bearing an intense relational charge,
such as Coca-Cola, wheat bread, or dairy butter with yams,
breadfruit or a revived production of madou, mabi or any
other "local" products. AlI the more since products of this
sort, whose excellence depends on their fragility, do not tend
to keep weIl, which is one of the secrets of Iarge-scale commerce. Standardization of taste is "managed" by the industrial powers.
There are plenty of native Martinicans who will confess
that when they were children they used to hate breadfruit (a
staple vegetable and, therefore, intimately associated with
the idea of poverty and the reality of destitution). Then the
reverse has become true with age, especially for those who
have lived for a long time away from the island-they have
acquired a lasting taste for it. Any survey taken would show
the same to be true today for most of the children in Martinique. With a fierce "tchip!" of the lips, children reject even
the thought of breadfruit and relish the idea of dried
sausage. ln countries in which imports reign, childhood is
the first deportee.
1 made note of sorneone who, claiming to criticize novelists from Martinique whose vision of reality is expressed in
148the poetics of a language irrigated by Creole, spoke disdainfully of "dachinisme" (from the word dachine [dasheen], or
Chinese cabbage, another local vegetable). Thus, the sarne
negativity is used to punish any production that does not consent to international standardization or conform to the generalizing universal.
In rich nations, in which imports are balanced with more
or less difficulty by exports and in which, consequently, foreign goods offered for consumption are exchanged rnore or
less indirectly against local production, it is easier to maintain equilibrium between the levels. The international product has a less severe impact on sensibilities; "desire" for it is
not so irnplacable.
In poor countries any appeal for self-sufficiency grounded
solely in economics and good sense is doomed to failure.
Good sense is of no consequence in the tangle ofworld Relation. Sensibilities have become so profoundly contaminated,
in most cases, and the habit of rnaterial comfort is so weIl
established, even in the midst of the greatest poverty, that
political dictates or proclamations are inadequate remedies.
Here, as elsewhere, one ITlust figure out how much we have
to consent to the planetary evolution toward standardization
of consumer products (the present course in Martinique,
with French products widely imported) and how much we
should push for invention and a new sensibility in association
with "national" products.
This is where the irnagination and expression of an aesthetics of the earth-freed from quaint naiveté, to rhizome
instead throughout our cultures' understanding-become
indispensable.
It is certainly true that we do not work the land, are no longer
the country people we used to be, with our same old instinctive patience. Too many international parameters come into
this relationship. A man involved in agriculture is inevitably a
man involved in culture: he can no longer produce innocently.
149Daily wc hear about how occupations connected \vith the
land are among the sorriest that exist. The birmer's traditional solitude has become exacerbated by the embarrassed
thought that his work is anachronistic, in developed countries, or pathetic, in poor coun tries. In the f()rmer he struggles against productivity, taxes, markets, and surplus; in the
latter against dust, the lack of tools, epidcmics, and shortages. Roth here and there the display of technological wealth
overwhelms him. It would be obnoxious to indulge in idiotie
praise of the peasantry when it is going downhill this way
everywhere. vVill it die, or will it be transfunned into a reserve
labor force for advanced techniques?
It is said-·a commonplace-that the future of humanity is
at stake, unless, before extinction, such techniques make possible the massive production of artificial foods that would
take care of the richest. Picture an uncultivated land when
the factories producing synthetics have provided enough for
the stomachs of the chosen te\v. It would only be used for
leisure, for a kind of Voyage in which seeking and knowledge
would have no place at aIl. It would become scenery. That is
what would happen to our countries, since it is entirely possible that the aforesaid factories wendd never be located in
them (unless they are really responsible for producing too
much waste). We would inhabit Museums of Natural NonHistory. Reactivating an aesthetics of the earth will perhaps
help differ this nightmare, air-conditioned or not.
This trend toward international standardization of C011-
sumption will not be reversed unless we make drastic changes
in the diverse sensibilities of communities by putting forward
the prospect--or at least the possibility-of this revived aesthetic connection with the earth.
How can such a poetics be resuscitated, when its mind-s,et
drifts bctween the obsolete mysticism that we noted and the
mockery of production that is emerging everywhere? An aesthetics of the earth seems, as always, anachronistic: or naive:
reactionary or sterile.
150But we must get beyond this seemingly impossible task. If
we don't, aIl the prestige (and denaturation) felt in internationally standardized consumption will triurnph permanently
over the pleasure of consuming one's own product. The
problem is that these denaturations create imbalance and
dry things up. Understood in its full-sense, passion for the
land where one lives is a start, an action we must endlessly
risk.
An aesthetics of the earth? In the half·starved dust ofMricas?
In the mud of flooded Asias? In epidemics, masked forms of
exploitation, flies buzz-bombing the skeleton skins of children? In the frozen silence of the Andes? In the rains uprooting favelas and shantytowns? In the scrub and scree of Bantu
lands? In flowers encircling necks and ukuleles? In mud huts
crowning goldmines? In city sewers? In haggard aboriginal
wind? In red-light districts? In drunken indiscriminate consumption? In the noose? The cabin? Night with no candIe?
Yeso But an aesthetics of disruption and intrusion. Finding
the fever of passion for the ideas of "environment" (which 1
calI surroundings) and "ecology," both apparently such futile
notions in these landscapes of desolation. Irnagining the idea
of love of the earth-so ridiculously inadequate or else frequently the basis for such sectarian intolerance-with aIl the
strength of charcoal fires or sweet syrup.
Aesthetics of rupture and connection.
Because that is the crux of it, and almost everything is said
in pointing out that under no circumstances could it ever be
a question of transfonning land into territory again. Territory
is the basis for conquest. Territory requires that filiation be
planted and legitimated. Territory is defined by its limits, and
they must be expanded. A land henceforth has no Emits.
That is the reason it is worth defending against every form of
alienation.
Aesthetics of a variable continuum, of an invariant discontinuum.
151Self-sufficiency can be worked out. With the sole condition
that it not end up in the exc1usivity of territory. A necessary
condition but not enough to incite the radicalities capable of
saving us [rom an1biguity, rallied together within a land-·
scape-reforrrlIng our taste, without our having to force OUl"-
selves into it.
Thus, within the pitiless panorama of the worldwide commercial market, we debate our problems. No matter where
you are or what government brings you together into a comrnunity, the forces of this market are going to find you. If
there is profit to be made, they will deal with you. These are
not vague forces that you might accommodate out of politeness; these are hidden forces of inexorable logic that must be
answered with the totallogic of your behavior. For exarnple,
one could not accept state assistance and at the same time
pretend to oppose it. You must choose your bearing. And, to
get back to the question raised earlier, simply consenting
would not be worth it, in any case. Contradiction would knot
the community (which ceases to be one) with impossibilities,
profoundly destabilizing it. The entire country would
become a Plantation, believing it operates with freedom of
decision but, in fact, being outer directed. The exchange of
goods (in this case in Martinique: the exchange of imported
public money against exported private profit) is the rule.
Bustling commerce only confirms the fragmentation and
opposition to change. Minds get used up in this superficial
comfort, which has cost them an unconscious, enervating
braining.
This is the dilemma to be resolved. We, have learned that
peremptory dec1arations, grounded in the old Manichaeanism of liberation, are of no use here, because they only contribute to reinforcing a stereotypical language with no hold
in reality. These are allliabilities whose dialectics must first be
either realized or bypassed.
Thinking, for example, that ethnotechnology would save
us from excessive importation, protect the vivid physical quality of the country, find an equilibrium for our drive to COD--
152sume, and cement links among all the individuals concerned
with producing and creating amounts to saying that we would
return to a pretechnical, artisan level, elevated to the rank of
a system, leaving it to others to take care of providing us with
the spin-off from their dizzying experirnents, making us
admire from afar the achievements oftheir science, and renting us (but under what conditions) the fruits of their industry. Have sornething to exchange that isn't just sand and
coconut trees but, instead, the result of our creative activity.
Integrate what we have, even if it is sea and sun, with the
adventure of a culture that is ours to share and for which we
take responsibility.
There is no value to practicing self:'sufficiency, or consenting to interdependance, or mastering ethnotechnology,
unless these processes constitute both distancings from and
accord with (and in relation to) their referent: the multiform
e1sewhere always set forth as a monolithic necessity in any
country that is dominated.
We struggle against our problems, without knowing that
throughout the world they are widespread. There is no place
that does not have its elsewhere. No place where this is not an
essential dilemma. No place where it is not necessary to come
as close as possible to figuring out this dialectic of interdependencies or this difficult necessity for ethnotechniques.
The rnassive and diffracted confluence of cultures thus
makes every distancing (from a suggested or imposed prenorm) be deterrninant but also makes every (self:')determination be a generative distancing.
Now let us try to summarize the things we don't yet know,
the things we have no current means ofknowing, concerning
aIl the singularities, aIl the trajectories, aIl the histories, aIl
the forms of denaturation, and aIl the syntheses that are at
work or that have resulted frorn our confluences. How have
cultures-Chinese or Basque, Indian or Inuit, Polynesian or
Alpine-made their way to us, and how have we reached
them? What remains to us of all the vanished cultures, col-
153lapsed or exterrninated, and in what fôrrn? vVhat is our experience, even now, of the pressure of dominant cultures?
Through \vhat f~mtastic accumulations of how many existences, both individual and collective? Let us try to ca1culate
the result of aIl that. We will be incapable of doing so. Our
experience of this confluence will forever be only one part of
its totality.
No matter how many studies and references we accumulate (though it is our profession to carry out such things), we
will never reach the end of such a volume; knowing this in
advance makes it possible fur us to dwell there. Not knowing
this totality is not a weakness. Not wanting to know it certainly
is. Consequently, we imagine it through a poetics: this imaginary l'ealm provides the full-sense of aIl these always decisive
differentiations. A lack of this poetics, its absence or its negation, would constitute a failing.*
Similarly, thought of the Other is sterile without the other
ofThought.
Thought of the Other is the moral generosity disposing
me to accept the principle of alterity, to conceive of the world
as not simple and straightforward, with only one truthmine. But thought of the Other can (twell within me without
making me alter course, without "prizing me open," without
changing me within myse1f. An ethical principle, it is enough
that l not violate it.
The other of Thought is precisely this altering. Then l
have to act. That is the moment 1 change my thought, without renouncing its contribution. l change, and l exchange.
*1 see the extent to which this imaginary appears tn me to have a certain fonn in spacc: 1spoke of circularity (imitating, pcrhaps, those curvatures of space-time that Einstein invented) and of volume, the sphel'-
ical nature of concepts, of various poetics and the rcalities of the
rI!.U()S-ltW1UU', ail ofwhich reconstitutes (for me) the image orthe mother
planet, an Earth that would be primordial. But mothering is excluded
[rom this symbolic system-at least, I believe that it is. As weil as the idea
(so dear to ArisLOtle and Ptolemy) of a perfection in circularity.
154This is an aesthetics of turbulence whose corresponding
ethics is not provided in advance.
If, thus, we allow that an aesthetics is an art of conceiving,
imagining, and acting, the other ofThought is the aesthetics
implemented by me and by you to join the dynamics to which
we are to contribute. This is the part fallen to me in an aesthetics of chaos, the work 1 am to undertake, the road 1 arn to
travel. Thought of the Other is occasionally presupposed by
dominant populations, but with an utterly sovereign power,
or proposed until it hurts by those under them, who set
themselves free. The other of Thought is always set in motion
by its confluences as a whole, in which each is changed by
and changes the other.
Common sense tells us that the world through which we
rnove is so profoundly disturbed (most would calI it crazy)
and has such direct repercussions on each one of us that
sorne are obliged to exist in absolute misery and others in a
sort of generalized suspension. We line one day up after the
other, clay after day, as if the world clid not exist, though daily
it seeks us out with such violence. Yes, we act as if. For if we
stopped to think about it really we would let everything go. A
commonplace-one 1 have heard so often repeated.
To suspend the suspense we have recourse to this imaginary construct of totality, by rneans ofwhich we transmute for
ourselves this mad state of the world into a chaos that we are
able to contemplate. An imaginary rekindled by the other of
Thought. A distancing in relation to the predetermined or
irnposed norm but also prehaps in relation to the norms or
beliefs that we have passively inherited. How can we put this
distancing into practice if we have not fully mastered beforehand the things that are ours or part of us? Dependencies are
infirmities of Relation, obstacles to the hard work of its
entanglernent. Independencies, for the sarne reasons,
despite being uncomfortable or precarious, are always worth
something.
155The suffering of human cultures does not confine us permanentIy within a mute actuality, mere presence grievously
closed. Sometimes this suffering authorizes an absence that
constitutes release, soaring over: thought rising from the
prisms of poverty, unfurling its own opaque violence, that
gives-on-and-with every violence of contact between cultures.
The most peacefül thought is, thus, in its turn a violence,
when it imagines the risky processes of Relation l'et nonetheless avoids the always comfortable trap of generalization. This
antiviolence violence is no trivial thing; it is opening and creation. It adds a füll-sense to the operative violence ofthose on
the margins, the rebels, the deviants, all specialists in distanç-
ing.
The marginal and the deviant sense in advance the shock
of cultures; they live its future excess. The rebel paves the way
for such a shock, or at least its legibility, by refusing to be
cramped by any tradition at aIl, even when the force of his
rebellion comes from the defense of a tradition that is
ridiculed or oppressed by another tradition that simply has
more powerful means of action. The rebel defends his right
to do his own surpassing; the lives of marginal and deviant
persons take this right to extremes.
We have not yet begun to imagine or figure out the results
of aIl the distancings that are determinant. They have
emerged from everywhere, bearing every tradition and the
surpassing of them all, in a confluence that does away with
trajectories (itineraries), aIl the while realizing them in the
end.
Though the cultural contacts of the moment are territyingly "immediate," another vast expanse of time looms
before us, nonetheless: it is what will be necessary to counterbalance specifie situations, to defüse oppressions, to
assemble the poetics. This time to come seems as infinite as
galactic spaces.
Meanwhile, contemporary violence is one of the logicsorganic--of the turbulence of the chaos-monde. This violence
156is what instinctively opposes any thought intending to make
this chaos rnonolithic, grasping it to control it.
Distancings are necessary to Relation and depend on it: like
the coexistence of sea olive and manchineel.
157That That
1
The world's poetic force (its energy), kept alive within us, fastens itself by fleeting, delicate shivers, onto the rambling prescience of poetry in the depths of our being. The active violence in reality distracts us from knowing it. Our obligation
to "grasp" violence, and often fight it, estranges us fi'om such
live intensity, as it also freezes the shiver and disrupts prescience. But this force never runs dry because it is its own turbulence.* Poetry-thus, nonetheless, totality gathering
strength-is driven by another poetic dimension that we aIl
divine or babble within ourselves. It could weIl be that poetry
is basically and mainly defined in this relationship of itself to
nothing other than itself, of density to volatility, or the whole
to the individual.
This world force does not direct any line of force but
infinitely reveals them. Like a landscape impossible to epitomize. It forces us to imagine it even while we stand there neutral and passive.
Borne along by this force or raging to control it-not yet
having consented to the greatness that would come from par-
*The idea of this energy makes for a good joke: "the Force" is the leitmotiv fur a very fari10us metaphysicaljwestern movie sequence.
159taking of it-it will be a long time before we finally recognize
it as the newness of the world not setting itself up as anything
new.
The expression of this force and its way of being is what we
caIl Relation: what the world makes and expresses of itself.
2
When we ask the question of what is brought into play by
Relation, we arrive at that-there that cannot be split up into
original elements. We are scarcely at liberty to approach the
complete interaction, as much for the elements set in relation as for the relay mode relentlessly evolving.
vVe reassure ourselves with this overly vague idea: that Relation diversifies forms of humanity according to infinite
strings of models infinitely brought into contact and relayed.
This point of departure does not even allow us to outline a
typology of these contacts or of the interactions thus triggered. Its sole merit would lie in proposing that Relation has
its source in these contacts and not in itself; that its aim is not
Being, a self-important entity that would locate its beginning
in itself.
Relation is a product that in turn produces. "Vhat it produces cioes not partake of Being. That is why, without too
much anthroponl0rphic reductiveness perhaps, we can risk
individuating it here as a system, so as to speak about it by
name.
(But if we tried to approach the one obvious fact about
Being, we wouId arrive at the expedient point ofview that no
160questioning is possible-because Being cannot bear having
any interaction attached to it. Being is self-sufficient, whereas
every question is interactive.)
Prime elements do not enter into Relation. Any prime element would call up the shadow of Being. Lacking any reductive criteria, the undefinable realities of human cultures are
here looked upon as constituents, ingredients, with no possibility of our clairning them as primordial. We have ended up
thinking of cultures from a national, ethnic, generic (civilizational) angle, as "natural" phenomena of the movement of
interaction that organizes or scatters the world we have to
share.
This way of considering cultures has become widespread
through Relation's very involvement. It is through this window that we watch one another reacting together. Before
being perceived as the thing urging us into community, culture calls to mind what it is that divides us from aIl otherness.
It is a discriminating factor, with no ostensible discrimination. It specifies without putting aside. This is why cultures
are considered the natural elements of Relation, without
really calling the latter by name and without, for aH that,
their constituting its prime elernents.
3
Discussing the comparative values of cultures would arnount
to maintaining that cultural values are stable and acknowledged as such.
Contact among cultures infers, however, a relation of
uncertainty, in the perception one has or the experience one
senses of them. The mere fact of reflecting them in common,
161in a planetary perspective, inflects the nature and the "projection" of every specific culture contemplated. Decisive
mutations in the quality of relationships result from this, with
spectacular consequences that are often thus "experienced"
long before the basis for the change itself has been perceived
by the collective consciousness.
For example, the placid, traditional belief in the superiority of written languages over oral languages has long since
begun to be challenged. Writing no longer is, nor does it
appear to be, any guarantee of transcendence. The first
result of this was a widespread appetite for works of folklore,
sometimes wrongly considered to be bearers of truth or
authenticity; but then came a dramatic effort on the part of
most oral languages to become fixed-that is, to become
akin to writing, at the very instant that the latter was losing its
absolute quality. Behind this change is the oral/written relationship; its first, spectacular result, giving no clear indication of the interaction, ,vas the resurgence of folklores.
Henceforth, one of the least disputed measures of "civilization"-technological capability, with its basis in mastery of
sciences and control of economic factors-will find itself
branded as something negative (the catastrophes of the sorcerer's apprentice). Ecological protests (which the generic
anxieties of the science of ecolog)-' have led up to) have taken
up this interrupted cry even more resoundingly.
Cultures develop in a single planetary space but to different "times." It would be impossible to determine either a real
chronological order or an unquestionable hierarchical order
for these times.
One of the results of current cultural processes is a widespread anxiety magnifying worries about the future we must
contemplate together; this is every\vhere translated into a
need for futurologies. Never, until this contemporary period,
did any individual culture experience such an intense obsession with the future. The passion for astrology, the predictions and prophesies that were Assyrian or Babylonian in ori-·
162gin and that spread most actively, perhaps during the European Middle Ages, were far more the products of a synthesizing or magical thought than anything produced by concerns
about really safeguarding the future. The same held true for
the Mayans and Aztecs or in ancient China. Nor did the
notion of progress, so much touted by Victor Hugo, take
shape as motifs of anticipation. These days futurology is an
obsession that tends to set itself up as a science. But any possible laws of such a science would be stamped by the same
principle ofuncertainty that governs the métissage of cultures.
Our planetary adventure does not permit us to guess
where solutions to the problems born in precipitate contact
between cultures will arise. This is why we cannot put a hierarchical order to the different "times" pressing into this
global space. It is not certain that technological time will
"succeed," where ethnotechnical time, not yet decided upon
by cultures threatened today, would fail. It is not certain that
the time of History leads to confluences any faster or more
certainly than the diffracted times in which the histories of
populations are scattered and calI out to one another.
Within this problematic, beyond decisions made by power
and domination, nobody knows how cultures are going to
react in relation to one another nor which of their elements
will be the dominant ones, or thought of as such. In this fullsense aIl cultures are equal within Relation. And altogether
they could not be considered as its prime elements.
4
It is at their undefinable limits, through "precipitate contact," that cultures move. Can we keep them safe, isolate
163them, "create" them by definition? Can we preserve them
from the blIout (pressure or domination) that will take place
within them? The tendency, reinforced by how situations are
reported, to distinguish between a North and a South, industrialized countries and countries existing in absolute poverty,
barely disguises the scorn felt by the former for the latter.
Nor does it conceal the pitiless, agreed-upon stakes, maintaining and exacerbating distances; nor, alas, the inability of
pOOl' countries on their own, or through decisive effort by
those who govern them, to progress beyond the twilight zone
of deprivation. But this distinction, sanctioning an established fact, does not permit its full-sense to be completely isolated. As if the observation and the established fact, obeying
underground laws, and following their set path, gave rise
around them to an indifference of a new sort, which, in fact,
is neither egoism nor quite idiocy, and even less is it ignorance or lack of courage. Eroded or standardized forms of
sensibility are thus spread, but by both sides at once of the far
too visible dividing line.
Those are the facts that the planetary consciousness now
fonning and fully deculturing must adapt to, confronted by
this undecipherable magma.
There are pseudo force-lines, like so many traces that explain
too much, prophesied in this maelstrom. Planetary consciousness, rnanipulated from underground by anyone
profiting thereby, creates barriers for itself. By confusing, for
example, State and culture, the notion grows that there is
such a thing as legitimate States (democracies), a rank to
which progress will later lead the effective States reported to
be presently places of tyranny and brute violence. An odd lie,
one that is simultaneously political and cultural. Violence,
which determined which human communities sprang up,
today governs the difficult search for sorne balance in their
relations. The question should not be to transform effective
States gradually into legitimate States but to work toward
164making there be an effective state everywhere corresponding
to the legitimate state.
What is really legitimate is a culture in apposition to others,
one that is permeable and determinant. A culture is what
remains after States have passed away or what precedes thern
of necessity. Cultures can be shared when States have been in
confrontation. The limits-the frontiers-of aState can be
grasped, but a culture's cannot.
Pseudo force-lines hide-at the same time as they authorize-the real ones. Any expression of these real ones provokes in consciousness an unheard response of rejection. If
one forces oneself to be specifie about developments in
planetary consciousness, one cornes doser to one of the
dimensions of Relation without ever being in a position to
define its characteristics-because unvoiced and hard-toanalyze responses of rejection are just as determinant in
such matters as anything with widespread and public
assent. The rejection apparatus is aIl the more effective
when pseudo force-lines are imposed elsewhere through
the proliferation of glamorous fashions that provide an
illusion of fruitful innovation. The succession of rapidly
passing fashions, embodiment and lure of a passion for the
new, is put forth as the only guarantee of progress toward
reality. It apparently makes any patient attempts at imagining Relation obsolete. It would seem that experiencing
Relation, even if caricaturally, abusively, or superficially,
whether manie or totally devoured, would be enough to
sustain it. And that attempts at dealing with it in sorne sustained manner would faH into the category of a pedantic
pomposity that is cornpletely foreign to its exacerbated
content.
What we call actuality or current events in part is none other
than this transience offashions, taken to the utmost degree of
exasperation by an infinite number of agents of commotion,
flash agents.
165What is a flash agent? To conceive the question we must first
consider the age-old ways in which cultures have interacted
each time they have been in contact. Notjust the interaction
of their tendencies tO\vard attraction or repulsion but the
workings of their inner structures that become modified
each time-the network of similarity or osmosis, or r~jection
01' renaturing, that fonned, manifested itself, canceled itself
out, sirnply because of what could have been called rc1ay
agents. Formerly (and by agreement), these relay agents
needed relative obscurity, like a latency period, in relation to
their perception of the results of their action-to really work.
The relay agent was active because, tirst of a11, he went unnoticed.
Today flash agents are the relay agents who are in tune
with the irnplicit violence of contacts between cultures and
the lightning speed of techniques of relation. They send consciousness hllrtling into the sudden certainty that it is in possession of the obvious keys of interaction or, usually, into the
assurance that it does not need such keys. They dictate f~lshion and commonplace-these two modern embodiments of
interrelation.
If these risky keys (fashion and commonplace) seem to us
so very obvious, it is because the flash agents impress us especially through the immediacy (pure pressure) of their communication techniques. Their action is sufficient unto itself
here; there is no statecl ideology of communication. The
ones in control of it in the \vorld do not even have to justify
this control. They plainly sanction itjust by the fact that communication is continuously in flux: that is, its "[reedom"
made legitimate by its topicality, that is, its transience.
Relay agents, today transformed into flash agents, tend
thllS to reject as illoperable t\VO notions that were forrnerly of
mL~jor importance: the idea of structure and that of ideolobry.
The transformation of lday into flash strikes at the wcak
point of these two notions: their overemphasized generalizations in space and time. They too, the idea of structure and
the idea of ideology, also required a latency period to shed
166some light on what they were about. The violent haste of the
present offers them a challenge. Fashion sends the analysis
inferred by ideology drastically off course, and the commonplace scatters the intent preserved in structure's thoughtor, at least, this is what they fiercely claim to do.
167Relinked, (Relayed), Related
1
It would be impossible to maintain that each particular culture constitutes a prime elernent among aIl those activated in
Relation, since the latter defines the elements thus at stake,
and at the same time it affects (changes) them. Nor could it
be asserted that each particular culture is plainly knowable in
its particularity, since its proper limit is not discernible in
Relation.
Each particular culture is inlpelled by the knowledge of its
particularity, but this knowledge is boundless. By the same
token one cannot break each particular culture down into
prime elements, since its limit is not defined and since Relation functions both in this internaI relationship (that of each
culture to its components) and, at the same time, in an external relationship (that of this culture to others that affect it).
Definition of the internaI relationship is never-ending, in
other words unrecognizable in turn, because the components of a culture, even when located, cannot be reduced to
the indivisibility of prime elements. But such a definition is a
working model. It allows us to imagine.
Definition of the external relationship could be infinitely
analyzed as weIl, because, not being plainly composed of
prime-indivisible-elements, no particular culture in turn
169can be considered as a prime clement in Relation. The result
is that we come back to our original propositions, completing
the circle-the round-of our space-time. Paradoxically,
every breakthrough toward a definition of this extcrnal relationship (benveen cultures) perrnits us a better approach to
the components of each of the particular cultures considered.
Analysis helps us to imagine better; the imaginary then
helps us to grasp the (not prime) elements of our totality.
Case by case and society after society, the humanities, from
anthropology to socIology, have studied these structural components and dynamic relationships. But none of these disciplines forms any conception of the overaIl rhythm, though
without their work this would be inaccessible.
Ifwe carry over these two movements (internaI and external
relationship) to certain presuppositions of thought, the
assessment, perhaps, will be that the former is determined by
something related to the physical nature of beings, whereas
the latter would follow a course that amounts to an approach
to Being.
The internaI relay would be massive, operating directly,
whereas the external relation would be evasive (expanded),
too swift in any case for any possibility of grasping its laws of
operation at the rnoment that they apply.
We shall guard against suggesting, parabolically, that
beings would be solid and Being volatile nor that a variable
mass of beings would assume, in contrast, the infinity of
Being. We must, rather, abandon this apposition of Being
and beings: renounce the fruitful maxim whereby Being is
relation, to consider that Relation alonc is relation.
But Relation is not to be confused with the cultures we are
discussing nor with the economy of their internaI relationships nor with the projection of their external relationships
nor even with the intangible results of the intricate involvement of aIl internaI relationships with aIl possible external
170relationships. Nor is it to be confused with sorne marvelous
accident that might suddenly occur apart from any relationship, the known unknown, in which chance would be the
magnet. Relation is aU these things at once.
The genesis of a particular culture could be grasped and its
specificity approached without having to be defined. The
genesis of Relation cannot be approached, whereas the
definition of it can be, if not decided, at least imagined.
If one misjudged the intensity of the particularity of a culture, if one Ineant to deny the particular value of any culture,
for example, in the name of the universality of an AlI, the
implication would be either that Relation has its principle in
itself (it would be the universal in-itself and only that) or else
that it relays afferents providing one another with mutual ret:·
erence and consequently leading not to totality but to the
totalitarian.
The totalitarian is introduced into relation on the basis of
sorne nonprirne elernent (violence, for example, or race)
whose definition is overdetermined but knowledge ofwhich,
nonetheless, has limits. This totalitarian relation is, in turn,
approachable, but its definition cannot be imagined.
Because one cannot imagine a relation-open-among elements the knowledge of which has boundaries. Totality, on
the other hand, like Relation, is not approached, but its
definition is imaginable.
The difference between Relation and totality lies in the
fact that Relation is active within itself, whereas totality,
already in its very concept, is in danger of immobility. Relation is open totality; totality would be relation at l'est. Totality
is virtual. Actually, only rest could, in itself, be legitimately or
totally virtual. For rnovement is precisely that which realizes
itself absolutely. Relation is movement.
Not only does Relation not base its principles on itself (rather
with and through the elements whose relationship it con-
171ducts), but aIso these principles must be supposed to change
as rapidly as the elements thus put into play define (embody)
new relationships and change them.
Let us repeat this, chaotically: Relation neither relays nor
links afferents that can be assimilated or allied only in their
principle, for the simple reason that it always differentiates
among them concretely and diverts them from the totalitarian-because its work always changes all the elements composing it and, consequently, the resulting relationship, which
then changes themaIl over again.
2
Relation, as we have emphasized, does not act upon prime
elements that are separable or reducible. If this were true, it
would itself be reduced to sorne mechanics capable of being
taken apart or reproduced. It does not precede itself in its
action and presupposes no a priori. It is the boundless effort
of the worId: to become realized in its totality, that is, to evade
rest. One does not first enter Relation, as one might enter a
religion. One does not first conceive of it the way we have
expected to conceive of Being.
3
The thing that makes the understanding of every culture limitless is precisely the thing that allows us to imagine, without
172approaching it, the infinite interaction of cultures. Magma in
profusion, tending to empty aIl thought of ideology, which is
considered inapplicable to such an amalgam. Collective
drives tend more toward the literaI and utilitarian (the reassuring heft of coner'ete results promoted to the dignity of a
value) or toward the providential and ideal (the reassuring
determination of a cause or hero making choices for you).
LiteraI and ideal make good company for each other.
Repressed in this manner, ideological thought (the need
to analyze, understand, transforrn) invents new forms for
itself and plays tricks with profusion: it projects itself into
futurology, which also has no limits. It attempts, for exarnple,
to create a synthesis with likely applications from the sciences, which gradually leads into theories of model making.
The models dairn to base the rnatter of Relation in relationships; in other words, they daim to catch its movement in the
act and then translate this in terms of dynamic or energized
structures.
Thus, ideologicai thought and structural thought come
together in their use of models to protest against the amalgam's mixing action. Making models is a (generalizing)
attempt to get beyond the transient currency of fashion and
the falsely definitive obviousness of the comrnonplace.
4
Relation relinks (relays), relates. Domination and resistance,
osmosis and withdrawal, the consent to dominating language
(langage) and defense of dominated languages (langues).l
They do not add up to anything dearcut or easily perceptible
with any certainty. The relinked (relayed), the related, cannot be cornbined condusively. Their mixing in nonappear-
173ance (or depth) shows nothing revealing on the surface. This
revealer is set astir when the poetics of Relation calls UpOll
the imagination. What best emerges from Relation is what
one senses.
El' the same token, whenever vve try to analyze Relation,
the analysis as such being in turn an element of relation, it
seems pointless to grant every new proposition in a succession of convincing examples. The example only bears a relationship to one element of a multiple whose parts are in harmony with and repel one another in many areas at once.
Choosing one exanlple (introducing it as evidence, using it
for dernonstration) also unduly privileges one of these areas:
misperceiving relationship within Relation.
The accumulation of examples is reassuring to us but is
outside of any clairn to system. Relation cannot be "proved,"
because its totality is not approachable. But it can be imagined, conceivable in transport of thought. The accumulation
of exalnpIes aims at perfecting a never complete description
of the processes of relation, not circurnscribing them or giving legitimacy to sorne impossible global truth. In this sense
the most hannonious analysis is the one that poetically
describes flying or diving. Description is no proof; it sim ply
adds something to Relation insobr as the latter is a synthesisgenesis that never is cornplete.
Cultures coincide in the historie precipitousness (the
confluence of histories) that has become their commonplace. There is no point no\v to the vast expanses of time (let
us get back tü this) that formerly allowed slow, deep sedimentations to accumulate gradually. They used to authorize,
174unheeded, thus aIl the more decisive contacts whose quality
of interrelation was not immediately forseeable or measurable, in the same way that haste today distracts us, spreading
out before our eyes the networks of causality whose workings
we might have been able to discover. The results ofunheeded
contact became as essential as original elements, just as if
only the internaI movement of a particular culture had
caused them-an infinite and undefinable movement.
Industrialized nations have long beat time for this precipitousness, determining its speed and giving rhythm to trends,
through the control they exert over modes of power and
means of communication. The situation worldwide "integrates" cultures becoming exhausted by this speed and others that are stuck somewhere offby themselves. The latter are
kept in a state of sluggish, passive receptivity in which fantasies of spectacular development and overwhelming consumption remain fantasies.
An important principle of the process of interaction is that its
force lines can be reported without the report ever having
any effect. Conternporary flash agents (radios, newspapers,
televisions, films, and their by-products) have long ceased to
be capable of producing such effects, but this is because they
spread the radiance of their own dazzle, which is only the
reflection of force lines that go unnoticed. For that matter
this is possibly the quickest route to identifying the lines of
force thus revealed (identification being made not through
reflection but through the sort of diffracted provocation that
is the mark of these agents).
What is apparently an infinite regression (the accurnulation of cornrnonplaces that are publicly shared and celebrated in ephemeral rituals) thus withstands the presumed
barbarie nature of fashion but at the same time delineates
the evolving d~pth of Relation. It is no longer easy to spot the
possible influence of any group of individuals or works
belonging to an "elite," except at the limited stage of sorne
technical or scientific specialization that is tacitly recognized
175without verification. Proof by elite has ceased to count. The
enormous divagation replacing it leaves no time for retreat
or re-seizure.
Such an analysis, whose gears start to engage at the place
where flash agents are generated (roughly, the industrialized
countries) , is absolutely valid for those subjected to its imposition (roughly, the countries existing in absolute poverty).
We will never be able to list aIl the commonplaces echoing
throughout Relation: an idea rerun across many, in principIe, heterogeneous fields; repetitions (in a rudimentary and
caricatural but irrlmediately triumphant form) by flash
agents of sorrle reflected-upon information, which moreover
had gone under and vanishedjust because it was a reflection,
that is, suspiciously deep; baroque assemblages of force lines
that intensify in unexpected places, etc.
The cornmonplace (defined as the Inanifestation by sorne
flash agent of a major, latent, or unsuspected line of force)
thus immediately acquires a neutral power whose side effects
are spectacle and swift passage. Even the vely notion of fashion is outrun at this speed. lndeed, what we have is a
sequence of moments of inebriation whose sense no fashion
could fathom. Commonplaces are rambling, ephemeral particles within communication, this cold nodule; aIl the ideas
are in the air, but it is the public manifestation of these
(pushed, whenever possible, to the limit or simplified) that
counts. (Thus, the commonplace, lieu-commun, with its
hyphen in French between the two terms articulating and
constituting it, is the spectacular manifestation of this open
and mysterious poetic necessity-the common place.) 2 What
is public, therefore, is first spectacular. The conclusion is
immediately obvious: the cultures apart,* who are receivers
of this manifestation of the spectacular but not its generators,
have no thought that counts.
A particular culture can pretend to function off on the
*Apart is not the same as what was formerly peripheral: it refers to de
facto dependence, no longer a dependence by Law.
176sidelines (because ofbeing cut offfrom relay lines or because
it has no flash agents or because it chose, defining its own
dazzle to scorn such lines) , but it nonetheless plays a partbecause things couldn't be otherwise-as an active relay of
Relation.
The relaying action of cultures does not depend on their
will or even their power to relay. The consequences of the
succession of relays go beyond the occasion of the first relay,
or the original relay, which claimed to have started it aH. The
inadequacy of this claim is revealed when the sequence stops
or becomes realized in another area or another cycle. This is
why Relation, which is the world's newness, drives every possible fashion faster and faster. In contrast with the parade of
fashions, Relation does not present itself as anything new.
Indiscriminately, it is newness.
6
Any presence-even though it is ignored-of a particular
culture, even a silent one, is an active relay in Relation. Could
passive relays exist? Of course not, but in any case there are
neutral relays. A factor that is consumed in its own dazzle: the
intervention of one State on the territory of another, genocide, the universal triumph of a way of life, generalization of
a standardized product, humanitarian aid, an international
institution, commercial exchange on a large or small scale,
the rituai demonstration of sports gatherings, the great planetary sweH of gut-wrenching music. ... AlI these are direct
agents, in fact, but ones whose relay is not directly perceived
to the extent that what is spectacular about the agent overrides the continuum of its effect, and masks it through the
very organization of its spectacle. The difficulty one has in
177discerning the effects of interaction is what allows one to dit:..
ferentiate bet\,yeen neutral and active agents. A cultural presence can be active and ignored, whereas an intervention can
be, on the contraI')', spectacular and neutral. Here the neutral is not the ineffective but, rather, what is concealed
beneath the spectacle. The active is not dominant; it acts in
the continuum.
Flash agents transform into a neutral relay (neutralized in
the dazzle of its manifest proofs) the very thing that formerly
functioned as an active relay, one not immediately perceived
but long rendered dynamic by relay agents.
In consequence, we know what these relay agents are
today: they are échos-monde working with the matter of Relation. And, conversely, we can define the scope of the tactics of
flash agents; they literally reflect this matter, their reflections
manifCsting its violence without shedding any light on it or
shifting it or changing it.
Anyone who wishes tn intervene in modes of Relation (coloring, balancing, changing them perhaps) will find his action
on unsure footing because of this indeterminacy between
active and neutral relays. This is why such an intervention "in
Relation" can only l'eally happen "in a place," one simultaneously closed in on its components and open to its returning
echoes. There is no generalizable strategy of action in Relation that can be developed. Ideology has increased its "disciplined" efforts to go beyond this stubborn limit, precisely by
making generalizations: the proletariat's final l'Ole, permanent revolution, a nation 's civilizing mission, universal
defensc of freedom, or even the anticommunist crusade (we
have to hope that oppressors of every stripe will soon find this
pretext lacking), etc. These attempts at repossession or
global action run up against the singularities of Relation
every time. Relation is only universal through the absolute
and specifie quantity of its particularities.*
*Thc actions I.hat arc generalized in reality are hidden thele and hal'd
to spot: the actions of multinationals and power plots.
178It is the nature offlash agents to keep a distance, to widen the
gap between surfacing cultures and cultures of intervention
(one of the "undisciplined" forms of the generalizing universaI). They wear thought out with the apparatus of its delusion. They divert it toward the certainty that its "end" is to
perfect the very thing that reinforces their ernergence alone
as flash agents and maintains their simultaneously logical
and distorting power. They need the gap (between producing countries and recipient countries) to hold to their line.*
It would be a utopian assessment to say that cultures that do
not rnanipulate flash agents would be cornpensated with
sorne sort of reverse reward in a slow and balanced deepening of their values. While it is true that there is no way of
guessing '\vhere the real solutions will spring from," simply
having confidence in sorne sort of future justice would also
be presurnptuous. Ethnotechnology, for example (the appropriateness of needs and rneans within a given place), will not
have enough "natural" apparatus to force itself anyvvhere: its
agents are neutral and powerless; its airn T'uns out of stearn
and in the long run wears thin in the dazzling diffraction of
the flash agents. There is no escaping the precipitousness of
history, even if, through force or inclination, one keeps one's
distance when it avalanches.
*It would seem that, strictIy corresponding to the oid division hetween
the discoverers and the discovered, there is now a redivision bet\\leen
producer countries and recipient countries, except for japan. But let us
repeat that this redivision is no longer the result oflaw; it sanctions a de
facto domination, one not based on any privilege of knowiedge nor on
any daim to be absolute.
179v
POETICS
Beings, multiple infinite in subsistenceGENERALIZATION
~~
Recognizing, imagining, Relation.
Yet another undertaking, thoroughly disguised, ofuniversalizing generalization ?
Escape, the problems al our heels ?
No imagination helPs avert destitution in reality, none can
oppose oppressions or sustain those who "withstand" in body
or sPirit. But imagination changes mentalities, however slowly
it may go about this.
No matter where one is, no matter how strong the force of
errantry, one can hear the mounting desire ta ''give-on-andwith," ta discover arder in chaos or at least ta guess its unlike~y
motivation: ta develop this theory that would escape
generalizations.
Poetics? Precisely this double thrust, being a theory that tries ta
conclude, a presence that concludes (presumes) nothing. Never
one without the other. That is how the instant and duration
comfort us.
Every poetics is a palliative for eternity.That Those Beings Be Not Being
1
"Being is relation": but Relation is safe from the idea
of Being.
The idea of relation does not limit Relation, nor does it
fit outside of it.
The idea of relation does not preexist (Relation).
Sorneone who thinks Relation thinks by means of it,just as
does someone who thinks he is safe from it.
Relation contaminates, sweetens, as a principle, or as
flower dust.
Relation enferals, lying in wait for equivalence.
That which would preexist (Relation) is vacuity of Beingas-Being.
Being-as-Being is not opaque but self-important.
185Relation struggles and states itself in opacity. It deters
self-importance.
Whatever daims to preexist it is insufficient, that is
self~importance for itself.
Being-as-Being is sufficiency fur itself.
For which reason it is the echo of theidea of Being.
Relation does not assert Being, except to distract.
Also, when put forward in Relation, every assertion is a limit.
For Relation neither deteriorates through nor obliterates
any regression. Its patience outdistances depths and sea.
Thus Relation is idea of Being but scatters abroad from
Being-as-Being and confronts presence.
2
Beings remain, as long as Being dissipates.
Relation scatters fi-·om Being, asserts the sul~ject.
To himself the su~ject is a thick cloud of knowledge.
That is why Relation also dismant1es the thought of
non-Being.
That is why it is not: (of) Being, but:-(of) beings.
186Non-Being could not be except outside Relation.
Non-Being does not precede Relation, which is not
expressed on the basis of any break.
The nonbeing of Relation would be its irnpossible
completion.
3
Beings, which subsist and present themselves, are not
ITlerely substance, which would be sufficient unto itself.
Beings risk the being of the world, or being-earth.
The being of the world realizes Being:-in beings.
The being of the world cannot be divided from the being of
the universe and whatever imagines itself suspended in this
whole. This suspension is not primarily spatial.
The being of the world is total and limited. Its imagination
varies; its knowledge flows.
Relation is the knowledge in motion of beings, which risks
the being of the world.
Relation strives toward the being of the universe, through
consent or violence. This effort is not primarily spatial.
Never conceive of the being of the world or the being of the
universe as being of Being or fitting themselves to it.
187It depends upon Relation that the knowledge in motion of
the being of the universe be granted through osmosis, not
through violence.
Relation comprehends violence, marks its distance.
It is passage, not primarily spatial, that passes it~elf off as
passage and confronts the imaginary.
188For Opacity
Several years back, if 1 made the statement, "We dernand the
right to opacity," or argued in favor of this, whoever 1 was
speaking to would exclairn indignantly: "Now it's back to barbarism! How can you cOInmunicate with what you don't
understand?" But in 1989, and before very diverse audiences,
when thesarne demand was formulated, it aroused new interest. Who knows? Maybe, in the meanwhile, the topicality of
the question of differences (the right to difference) had
been exhausted.
The theory of difference is invaluable. lt has allowed us to
struggle against the reductive thought produced, in genetics
for example, by the presumption of racial excellence or superiority. Albert Jacquard (Éloge de la différence, Éditions du
Seuil, 1978) dismantled the mechanisms of this barbaric
notion and demonstrated how ridiculous it was to daim a
"scientific" basis for them. (1 calI the reversaI and exasperation of self barbaric and just as inconceivable as the cruel
results of these mechanisms.) This theory has also made it
possible to take in, perhaps, not their existence but at least
the rightful entitlement to recognition of the minorities
swarming throughout the world and the defense of their status. (1 caU "rightful" the escape far from any legitimacy
anchored silently or resolutely in possession and conquest.)
But difference itself can still contrive to reduce things to
the Transparent.
If we examine the process of "understanding" people and
189ideas fi'om the perspective of \IVestern though t, we discover
that its basis is this requirement tôr transparency. In order to
understand and thus accept you, 1 have tü measure your
solidity with the ideal scale providing me with grounds to
make comparisons and, perhaps, judgments. 1 have to
reduce. 1
Accepting difkrences does, of course, upset the hierarchy
of this scale. 1 understand your difference, or in other words,
without creating a hierarchy, 1 rclate it to my norm. 1 admit
you to existence, within my system. 1 create you afresh. -But
perhaps we need to bring an end to the very notion of a scale.
Displace aIl reduction.
Agree not mere1y to the right to difference but, carrying
this further, agree also to the right to opacity that is not
enclosure within an impenetrable autarchy but subsistence
within an irreducible singularity. Opacities can coexist and
converge, weaving fabrics. To understand these truly one
must focus on the texture of the weave and not on the nature
of its components. For the time being, perhaps, give up this
oid obsession with discovering what lies at the bottom of
natures. There would be something great and noble about
initiating such a movement, referring not to Humanity but ta
the exultant divergence of humanities. Thought of self and
thought ofother here become obsolete in their duality. Every
Other is a citizen and no longer a barbarian. What is here is
open, as much as this there. 1 would be incapable of prqjecting hum one ta the other. This-here is the weave, and it
weaves no boundaries. The right to opacity would not establish autism; it would be the real foundation of Relation, in
freedoms.
And now what they tell me is, ''You calmIy pack your poetics
into these craters of opacity and daim to rise so serenely
beyond the prodigiously elucidating work that the "\lest has
accomplished, but there you go talking nonstop about this
West." -"And what would you rather 1 talk about at the
beginning, if not this transparency whose aim was to reduce
190us? Because, if l don't begin there, you will see me consumed
with the sullen jabber of childish refusaI, convulsive and powerless. This is where l start. As for my identity, 1'11 take care of
that myseIf." There has to be dialogue with the West, which,
moreover is contradictory in itself (usually this is the argument raised when l talk about cultures of the One); the complementary discourse of whoever wants to give-on-and-with
must be added to the West. And can you not see that we are
implicated in its evolution?
Merely consider the hypothesis of a Christian Europe, convinced of its legitimacy, rallied together in its reconstituted
universality, having once again, therefore, transformed its
forces into a "universal" value-triangulated with the technological strength of the United States and the financial sovereignty ofJapan-and you will have sorne notion of the silence
and indifference that for the next fifty years (if it is possible
thus to estimate) surround the problems, the dependencies
and the chaotic sufferings of the countries of the south with
nothingness.
And also consider that the West itself has produced the
variables to contradict its impressive trajectory every time.
This is the way in which the West is not monolithic, and this
is why it is surely necessary that it move tmvard entanglement.
The real question is whether it will do so in a participatory
manner or if its entanglement will be based on old impositions. And even if we should have no illusions about the realities, their facts already begin to change simply by asking this
question.
The opaque is not the obscure, though it is possible for it to
be so and be accepted as such. It is that which cannot be
reduced, which is the most perennial guarantee of participation and cont1uence. We are far from the opacities of Myth or
Tragedy, .whose obscurity was accompanied by exclusion and
whose transparency aimed at "grasping." In this version of
understanding the verb to grasp contains the movement of
191hands that grab their sUIToundings and bring them back to
themselves. A gesture of enclosure if not appropriation. Let
our understanding prefer the gesture of giving-on-and-with
that opens finally on totality.
At this point 1 need to explain what 1 mean by this totality 1
have made so much noise about. It is the idea itself of totality,
as expressed so superbly in Western thought, that is threatened with immobility. We have suggested that Relation is an
open totality evolving upon itself. That means that, thought
of in this manner, it is the principle of unity that we subtract
from this idea. In Relation the whole is not the finality of its
parts: for multiplicity in totality is totally diversity. Let us say
this again, opaquely: the idea of totality alone is an obstacle
to totality.
We have already articulated the poetic force. We see it as
radiant-replacing the absorbing concept of unity; it is the
opacity of the diverse anirnating the imagined transparency
of Relation. The imaginary does not bear with it the coercive
requirements of idea. It prefigures reality, without determining it a priori.
The thought of opacity distracts me from absolute truths
whose guardian 1 might believe myself to be. Far from cornering me within futility and inactivity, by lnaking me sensitive to the limits of every method, it relativizes every possibility of every action within me. Whether this consists of
spreading overarching general ideas or hanging on to the
concrete, the law of facts, the precision of details, or
sacrificing some apparently less important thing in the name
of efficacy, the thought of opacity saves me from unequivocal
courses and irreversible choices.
As far as my identity is concerned, 1 will take care of it
myself. That is, 1 shaH not allow it to become cornered in any
essence; 1 shaH also pay attention to not mixing it into any
arnalgam. Rather, it does not disturb me to accept that there
are places where my identity is obscure to me, and the fact
that it amazes me does not mean 1 relinquish it. Human
192behaviors are fractal in nature. If we become conscious of
this and give up trying to reduce such behaviors to the obviousness of a transparency, this will, perhaps, contribute to
lightening their load, as every individual begins not grasping
his own motivations, taking hinlself apart in this manner. The
rule of action (what is called ethics or else the ideal or just
logical relation) would gain ground-as an obvious fact-by
not being mixed into the preconceived transparency of universaI models. The rule of every action, individual or community, would gain ground by perfecting itself through the
experience of Relation. It is the network that expresses the
ethics. Every moral doctrine is a utopia. But this morality
would only become a utopia if Relation itself had sunk into
an absolute excessiveness of Chaos. The wager is that Chaos
is order and disorder, excessiveness with no absolute, fate
and evolution.
1 thus am able to conceive of the opacity of the otherfor me,
without reproach for my opacity for hirn. To feel in solidarity
with hirn or to build with hirn or to like what he does, it is not
necessary for me to grasp hirn. It is not necessary to try to
becorne the other (to becorne other) nor to "make" hirn in
rny image. These projects of transrnutation-without rnetempsychosis-have resulted frorn the worst pretensions and the
greatest of rnagnanirnities on the part of West. They describe
the fate of Victor Segalen.
The death of Segalen is not just a physiological outcorne.
We recall his confiding, in the last days of his life, about the
slovenliness of his body, whose illness he was unable to diagnose and whose dec1ine he was unable to control. No doubt
it will be known, with a list of his syrnptoms and the help of
rnedical progress, what he died of. And no doubt the people
around hirn could say he died of sorne sort of generalized
consurnption. But 1 rnyself believe that he died of the opacity
of the Other, of corning face to face with the irnpossibility of
accomplishing the transmutation that he dreamed of.
Like every European of his day, he was marked with a sub-
193stantial, even if unconscious, dose of ethnoccntrism. But he
was also possessed, more than any of his contemporaries, by
this absolute and incomplete generosity that drove him to
realize himself elsewhere. He suffered from this accursed
contradiction. Unable to know that a transier into transparency ran counter to his pr~ject and that, on the contrary,
respect for mutual fonns of opacity would have accomplished
it, he was heroically consumed in the impossibility of being
Other. Death is the outcome of the opacities, and this is why
the idea of eleath never leaves us.
On the other hand, if an opacity is the basis for a Legitimacy,
this would be the sign of its having entered into a political
dimension. A formidable prospect, less dangerous perhaps
than the erring ways to which so many certainties and so
many clear, so-callcel lucid truths have led. The excesses of
these political assurances woulel fortunately be contained by
the sense not that everything is futile but that there are limits
to absolute truth. How can one point out these limits without
lapsing into skepticism or paralysis? How can one reconcile
the hard line inherent in any poli tics and the questioning
essential to any relation? Only by understanding that it is
irnpossible to reduce anyone, no matter who, to a truth he
wcndd not have generated on his own. That is, within the
opacity ofhis time and place. Plato's city is for Plato, Hegel's
vision is for Hegel, the griot's town is for the griot. Nothing
prohibits our seeing them in confluence, without confusing
them in SOlne magma or reducing them to each other. This
same opacity is also the force that drives every community:
the thing that would bring us together forever anel make us
permanently distinctive. Widespread consent to specifie
opacities is the most straightforward equivalent of nonbarbarism.
We clamor for the right to opacity for everyone.
194Open Circle, Lived Relation
There is a point at which Relation is no longer expressed
through a procession of trajectories, itineraries succeeding
or thwarting one another, but explodes by itself and within
itself, like a network, inscribed in the self-sufficient totality of
the world.
We leave behind the imaginary that projects, with its daring inventions, its escapades, the unknown things it has
risked: flaming arrows and unmerciful shots. The thrust of
the world and its desire no longer embolden you onward in a
fever of discovery: they multiply you aIl around.
Having in the end, and despite aIl the impossibilities,
drawn near Relation and acknowledged our presentiments
of how it works, now we must disindividuate it as a system,
stretch it to the rnass that bursts forth just from its energy,
finding ourselves there along with others.
To disindividuate Relation is to relate the theory to the lived
experience of every form of humanity in its singularity. This
means returning to the opacities, which produce every
exception, are propelled by every divergence, and live
through becoming involved not with projects but with the
reflected density of existences.
What we caU the world today is not only the convergence
of the histories of peoples that has swept away the daims of
philosophies of History but also the encounters (in consciousness) among these histories and materialities of the
195planet. Catastrophic fires reactivate the work of genocides;
famines and droughts take root in suicidaI political regimes;
warring parties defoliate on a staggering scale; floods and
hurricanes caU forth international solidarity, yet no one can
prevent thern or really combat their effects; humanitarian
movements that have sprung up in wealthy nations strive to
bandage the open sores in poor countries, inflicted more
often than not by the merciless economies of these same rich
countries; jungles and tribes are simultaneously torn up by
the roots; and so it goes on endlessly. The shock wave set off
in the European consciousness by the earthquake in Lisbon
in the eighteenth century has spread far and wide. No
specific history (joy or tragedy, extortion or liberation) is
shut up solely in its own territory nor solely in the logic of its
collective thought. The woes of the landscape have invaded
speech, rekindling the woes of humanities, in order to conceive of it. Can we bear ad infinitum this rambling on of
knowledge? Can we get our minds off it? Here the imaginary
of totality saves us from escheat-from reverted errantry.
If~ however, we mean to escape either vague ram bling or
the neutralizing tactics of suspension we ordinarily use to
avoid it, we rnust not just imagine totality as we earlier suggested nor simply approach Relation through a displacement
of thought; we must also involve this imaginary in the place
we live, even if errantry is part of it. Neither action nor place
are generalizable.
What 1 said about antillanité, in this place where we, men
and women of the Caribbean, rise up, represents quite simply
the will to rally together and diffract the Ante-Islands
confirming us in ourselves and joining us to an elsewhere.
For us antillanité, a method and not a state of being, can
never be accomplished, nor can we go beyond it.
But though we are thus entering modernity, by confirming
the work of our cultures, we cannot be unaware that one of
modernity's most persistent motifs is wholly embodied in the
unconscious drive that wills deculturation. Because humani-
196ties sense that their cultures constitute the (not prime) elements of the generality of chaos-monde, they instinctively
indulge in anticultural backlash. As if they wanted to preserve this generality from any normative effects that the culture's thought might have introduced. (Moreover, it doesn't
matter how we stigmatize one episode or another, for exampIe, of the Chinese Revolution, when the entire apparatus of
flash agents aims for the same anticultural elementarity.) As
if they meant to assert that cultures do not delineate
preestablished harmonies, that the histories of peoples do
not aIl work toward a single genealogy.l lVlodern violence is
anticultural, which means it tries hard to guarantee the open
energy of the shock between cultures. Is this a return of barbarism, or is it sorne prophetic precautionary measure
against the barbarism of reductiveness and uniformity?
One of the constants of this rnodern violence is that its
duty is to be staged at an costs. Whether this modern violence
is real or simulated, it demands to shine and cannot do without the services of flash agents. The underground violences,
in the ghettos or in the bush, the violences of obscure wars
for survival, come unraveled when solutions appear. The
blacks in the United States, in the places where they are the
poorest, because they are the poorest, because the means of
existence are beyond them, and because they have no other
solutions, exert a total violence in the city underground. The
violence of destitute poverty is not, however, a mission. But
modern violence, born of the shock among cultures, is of
another sort. It feeds on its own dazzle and is exacerbated by
its own feedback.
Two of the te1evision shows that struck me most in the
United States, in a surprising parallel, present a mixture of
belief, intensified by its own spectacle and by a willingness to
be1ieve, which is kept up beyond any approximations of spectacle. Wrestling matches are not really meant to determine
which cornpetitor is the strongest. In the audience, however,
they stir up waves of irrepressible violence, stripped of any
skepticism. This is not a matter of displaying only bestial vio-
197lence but, going rnuch funher, a pure (if one can calI it that)
violence, white as metal heated to the most intense incandescence. The audience believes in this violence, in its spectacle;
it comes fôr that. It comes in Ülmilies, with children. It does
not care that staging conceals the cheating. The desire for
manifest violence is str'onger than any suspicion of hidden
nonviolence. The alarming costumes of the wrestlers, the
incredibly heightened language that they engage in during
the televised interviews heralding their fights and serving to
advertise them, the surge of pretend or real sadism onstage,
all make it perfectly obvious that the rule here is to produce
the severest shock possible.
There i5 another spectacle that is just as astounding
because of its suppressecl violence: TV preaching. These
preachers give a physical performance, making the most of
the body's every posture. They imitate the extremely effective
gestures of black actors, they weep, they sing, they play the
piano, they turn the voltage as high as it will go and keep the
physical and spiritual tension up relentlessly befure resolving
it in a b1essed beatitude. Those present (and perhaps also the
television vie\'\'ers?) aIl weep in unison, faint, and go into
trances. That the preaching is staged does not bot11er anyone
nor do the scandaIs concerning the behavior and corrupt
practices that have sullied a number of these dazzling ministers, these flash preachers. The desire for catharsis is stronger
than any suspicion of insincerity.
,L\.-;ceticism through violence, in order to rediscover an
original purity. Vou have to show that l'ou abandon yourself
to it and tha.t this works. This is not l'et the violence of barbarism but a desperate guest. Barbarism (tyrannical self-love)
cornes later. That is whl' such powerful personal generosities
exist in this country: they are an endeavor to fend off the convulsions of the maelstrom. Although the social service laws
are ridiculousll' inadequate here compared with the various
European legislations in force, nowhere eise in the \vorId
does a caIl for gifts and private contributions encounter such
a response, h'eguentll' verging on naiveté. The violence of
198deculturation is thus somehow domesticated: caught up in
dailiness.
Let us not stop with this commonplace: that a poetics cannot
guarantee us a concrete means of action. But a poetics, perhaps, does aIlow us to understand better our action in the
world.We consider, for instance, how our requirement for
cultural responsibility, inseparable from political independence, is to be related to the prophylactic violence of forms
of deculturation. Put into Relation. That is what one rnight
caIl "defolkloration." The reductions of folklore (the belief
that only atavistic energies will provide an existence) lie in
ambush for aIl cul tures, whether or not they are technological. The awareness of modernity leads us away from this
reductiveness, offering us the image of relations, similarities
of situation or diverging directions, between what is us and
what is other.
But we must also examine the need to be careful, because
every generalization gives birth ta its illusions. 2 For example:
though folklore debilitates, it just as powerfully creates rhizomes. One could say that modernity, when it puts us thus in
a position to be relative without being lost, coadjusts without
confusing.
What means do we have at our disposaI to balance these
requirements, which are not necessarily harmonic?
First, the imaginary. It works in a spiral: fi-om one circularity to the next, it encounters new spaces and does not transform them into either depths or conquests. Nor is it confined
to the binarities that have seemed to preoccupy me throughout this book: extension/filiation, transparency/ opacity;) ...
The imaginary becomes complete on the margins of every
new linear projection. It creates a network and constitutes
volume. Binarities only serve as conveniences for approaching it", weave.
The imaginary cornrnents with a dirge, or it just giggles.
Usually, approaching the chaos-nlOnde in aIl its turbulence, it is
199wary of this reserve dirnension referred to as humoI'. Humor
ahvays presupposes sorne hidden reference, providing the
humorist his superiority. Humor derives from a classicism left
unspoken or, quite the opposite, put in question as in the
black humor of the surrealists. But its corrosive power is perhaps dissipated in the turbulence of the chaos-monde, in which
classicisms do not occur. The Creole storyteller does not want
to be a humorist; he is surprising in his talent (which should
not be said to be innate) for relentlessly bringing together
the rnost heterogeneous elernents of reality. Pierre Reverdy
describes the same thing operating in poetry. There is no hidden reference in it but, rather, an uninterrupted process of
revelation: of putting into relation. There ought to be sorne
other word to define this bringing together when it astounds
us and deflects us from convention.
The preferred scene of the poetics of Relation is plainsong
or a yell (in duration or in the instant) because this poetics is
disgusted by the offuandedness assumed by any presumption
of superiority. In truth, however, this preference does not
hold. Baroque speech does not acknowledge any preestablished norm. It recognizes only the rigors of form, precisely
because it is confronting excessiveness.
Next, the approach to reality. Conceiving of the order and
disorder of the chaos-monde does not put you in a privileged
position to oppose those who perpetuate their powers of perversion. And yet, if we tried to make a list here concerning
loci of hardship and oppression, one of those lists sketched
throughout this book about other subjects, this one would
surely be the longest. In totality powers reinforce their powers, and it is the weakness of aesthetic thought, of the various
specific poetics, that they "make believe" when confronted by
this other sort of maelstrom. Though the irnaginary of totality may be of no use to anyone in organizing resistance, at
least it is possible to think it would allow everyone sorne protection against the numerous bad habits that are the result of
ideology's time-honored thoughts.
How many revolutions, full of how many instances of
200going beyond, have not foundered in bIind lirnitations,
absurd principles, thus rejoining the things they struggled
against? The poetic perception of the chaos-monde leads us to
sense a few of the lessons of these many disastrous attempts.
As for me, and only for myself~ that is, with no pretense of giving a lesson, l would sum up these lessons as follows:
The control of an action is in its act.
The full-sense of an action is in its place.
The future of an action is in Relation.
These three statements are not intended to constitute a
law. They rnean that, once totality has been conceived of, one
could not daim to evoke it a priori in order to intercede in
problems here and now but that no solution that is acted
upon could, however, ignore or underestimate this totality's
activity-which is Relation.
Against those who deal out generalizing lessons. Against
ideology content with its own company. Against petty local
masters. Against an intolerant, nationalist sedusion. Against
those who erect borders. Those obsessed with military power.
Those who are the repositories of the collective consciousness. The mouthpieces.
There is no naiveté involved in thus "relativizing" the most
particular actions thus within the concrete matter of Relation. Habit cannot be snared at one feU swoop. We are just
barely beginning to have sorne idea of this underground
logic that is not irnposed as predicates but that subjects us
collectively to our contradictions.
Contradictions. The racist Boers of South Mrica are in
sedusion there. They stubbornly invoke the sacredness of
root (though filiation is not exportable), and they are unable
to consent to the approaches of Relation. They have taken
refuge in the rigidity of Apartheid. Oppressed blacks in this
country are the bearers of going beyond. They could have
merely withdrawn into the sacred that is Territory (they have
201an ancestral "right" to it, which is, of course, why a point was
made of assigning them reservations on this soil), but the terrible intensity of their struggle leads them, however imperceptibly or chaotically, to encounters with people of mixed
blood, with Indians, with whites: it teaches them and inspires
them with the sense of Relation. Nelson Mandela is an échomonde. Wherever oppressors, in one form or anothel, impose
themselves, those who are oppressed represent, through
their very resistance, the guarantee of such a future, even if it
is fI'agile and threatened.* Meaning well has nothing to do
with it but, rather, the demand fôr totality, that every form of
oppression tries to reduce and that every resistance contributes to increasing.
Then words, no one's fiefdom, meet up with the materiality
of the world. Relation is spoken.
1 was struck by the coyer of a magazine (Paris j\![atch, May
Il, 1989), whose tactics are certainly those of a flash agent),
on which l read the caption:
CHERNOBYL:
12 villages to be eV(lruated,
the wolves are returning
the jJines are blue
What was the infinite detour taken by this nuclear catastrophe, whose worldwide repercussions were felt among the
destitute as well as among the well-to-do, in savanna villages,
probably, just as much as in skyscrapers, and which consequently fed the most passively experienced of commonplaces
in the planetary consciousness, that led it also to be condensed into what seemed to be an involuntary poem,
through which it happened that the world could speak to us?
*Opprcssivc powers know this very ,vcIl and attempt to incite "hernes,"
whcthcl l'cal or mythic, to symbolize theil' causes. Thus thcre appcar
pseudo-hfws-monde, which Western opinion has apparently become
expert at creating.
202The Iandscape forced its way through the dazzling barrier,
fixing upon the superficiaI brilliance this terse scrap of utterance.
The circle opens up once more, at the same time that it
builds in volume. Thus, at every moment Relation becornes
complete but also is destroyed in its generality by exactly what
we put into action in a particular time and place. Relation
that is destroyed, at every instant and in every circumstance,
by this particularity spelling our opacities, through this singularity, becomes once again the experience of relation. Its
death as generality is what creates the life it has to share. For,
if every group of humankind were to fully live Relation, they
would divert the concept into the naturaIity that would have
made it concrete. Relation exists in being realized, that is, in
being completed in a common place.
This movement allows giving-on-and-with the dialectic
among aesthetics. If the imaginary carries us from thinking
about this world to thinking about the universe, we can conceive that aesthetics, by means of which we make our imaginary concrete, with the opposite intention, always brings us
back from the infinities of the universe to the definable poetics of our world. This is the world frorn which aIl norms are
eliminated, and also it is this world that serves as our inspiration to approach the reality of our tirne and our place. Thus,
we go the open circle of our relayed aesthetics, our
unflagging politics. We leave the rnatrix abyss and the immeasurable abyss for this other one in which we wander without
becoming lost.
203The Burning Beach
The sand sparkled. Sorne subterranean (submarine) force
repressed what northern volcanoes supplied. The beach is
now without cover, without surprises, like a prisoner.
Strolling tourists spread their towels on it. Not very many
because this is an out-of-the-way spot. Not a single big wave to
distract you from the pleasure of lethargy. Order and comfort have timidly returned.
Beneath the conventional irnage, the kind one sees developed-or summarized-in publicity films in the United
States or]apan, the luxuriously fatal irnage for selling a country ("The Antilles cheap"),* beneath this insipid facade, we
rediscover the ardor of a land. l see the mockery of the
image, and l do not see it. l catch the quivering of this beach
by surprise, this beach where visitors exclaim how beautiful!
how typical! and l see that it is burning.
For its background, it has the mornes, whose silence can be
frightening, the same hills that stand ragged above the Cohée,
the bay of Lamentin and the devastated mangrove there.
They are trying to fill in this mangrove swamp, zoning it for
industry or for rnajor centers of consumption. Yet still the
swamp resists. My friends took rne there, drifting along, looking for hot spots, those redwater muds that gurgle and burn
*The Europeans, in anticipation of the Acte unique of 1993, are buying
land here without leaving home: they put in their orders and delegate
power of attorney.
205here and there in the mangrove.* The words of the vo1cano
rolling in thesc mouths come back to me, more rneaningful
now than when 1 roamed the place as a child. The same
words that used to adorn the sand in dark, penitential vestments, thcn, bit by bit pulling back, uncovered its Iuminosity.
This tie between beach and island, which allows us to take
off like m.rrrrnns, tu' fUH11 the permanent tourist spots, is thus
tied into the dis-appearance-a dis-appearing-in which the
depths of the vo1cano circulate.
1 have always imagined that these depths navigate a path
beneath the sea in the west and the ocean in the east and
that, though we are separated, each in our own Plantation,
the now green balls and chains have rolled beneath hom one
island to the next, weaving shared rivers that we sha11 open
up when it is our time and where we shaH take our boats.
From where 1 stand 1 see Saint Lucia on the horizon. Thus,
step by step, calling up the expanse, 1 am able to realize this
seabow.
1 am cloing the same thing in the way 1 say lOe--organizing
this work around it. Is this sorne community rue rhizomed into
fragile connection to a place? Or a total we involved in the
activity of the planet? Or an ideal lOf drawn in the swirls of a
poetics?
Who is this intervening they? The.y that is Other? or they the
neighbors? or they whom 1 imagine when 1 try to speak?
These lOfS and theys are an evolving. They fincl their ful1-
sense, here, in my excessive use of the words totalit} and Relation. This excess is repetition that signifies.
They fînd full-sense in the extension of discoul'se, in which
peremptory abstract notions gain force only through force of
*Bakelies, ironicaIly, are also called "hot spots," j)()inls c!l([/u!), \"hen
their brcad is dclivcred hy air fWIll France, already sl1aped into
baguettes, ready-made (/oiss{[nls and jwillS au dwm[al. a greenish-gray
fro/en dough. All the bakery has to do is put them in the microwave
... to our grcat delight.
206accumulation, since they cannot burn in the body's charcoal
fire. The word mass burns, frorn its amassing.
They find full-sense in the echo of the land, where morne
meets beach, where the motifs are intertwined in a single vegetation, like words off the page.
Red-earth-red, blacker underneath than the black chalk of
our dreams. The clouds of the Pitons entangled in enormous
ferns, the passionately gray sand where so many volcanoes
joined in, the fIat stretch ofbanana trees' dirty lumps of curl,
the yam ravines where you can stand up, traces marked along
the crests like stubborn sulphur, the light-giving shade of
verandas where old and jagged bamboo stirs.
So what cornes over us then is neither flash nor revelation
but piling up and a vague endlessly repeated impatience.
Suddenly, there is something about the morne. A moving on
the surface of chaos that changes chaos by its movement.
This is not a neutral point; it is not the starting point of a
blueprint; it too sends rhizomes into the earth.
(So now, finally, they hint that l have already said all or
most of what is said here in Soleil de la conscience, that little
book published more than thirty years ago. And l agree. We
travel on the surface, in the expanse, weaving our imaginary
structures and not filling up the voids of a science, but rather,
as we go along, removing boxes that are too full so that in the
end we can imagine infinite volurnes. Volumes like the space
sieves invented by the technicians of Chaos that seem filled
simply with their own echo.)
(And now here cornes the clan of little goats too, leaping
morning and evening, to stop off inside the garden wall,
invading its grounds and foraging among the sweet breadfruit and the rotting prunes de cyfheTe. Their keeper is right
behind thern, chasing thern toward the dirt road that runs
along the beach. The goats' stampeding toward this ritual
meal, the shouts of the young goatherd, the circulaI', disjointed movement, from their hungry storming of the gar-
207den to their panicked departure, never changes. And l could
never imagine closing the garden gate or banning the animals' detour.)
This shadow on the morne aIl by itself is a school of little
goats, rioting in its own noise.
The man who walks (because that's who it is) has soon come
down from the hills; once again he is' making sense of the
beach. His energy is boundless, his withdrawal absolute.
Distant reader, as you recreate these irnperceptible details
on the horizon, you who can imagine-who can indulge the
time and wealth for imagining-so many open and closed
places in the world, look at him. Imagine him, falling irreversibly into prostration or suddenly waking up and starting
to scream or else gradually succumbing to his family's attentions or aU at once going back to his daily route, without further explanation. He signs to you with this bare outline of a
movement that precedes aIl languages. There is so much of
the world to be uncovered that you are able to leave this one
person alone in his outlook. But he will not leave you. The
shadow he throws from a distance is cast close by you.
As for those ofus who follow him, ifwe can put it that way
(but we do know the rhythm of his passages; we are able to
anticipate them), we are beginning to accept the fact that he
is more resistant than we and more lasting than our endless
palaver. No one could be content with this enclosed errantry,
this circular nomadism-but one with no goal or end or
recommencing. The absent rnan who walks exhausts no territory; he sets roots only in the sacred of the air and evanescence, in a pure refusaI that changes nothing in the world.
We are not following him in reality, because we always want to
change something. But we know in the end that his traveling,
which is not nomadism, is also not rambling. It traces
repeated figures here on the earth, whose pattern we would
catch ifwe had the means to discover it. This man who walks
is an écho-monde who is consumed within himseIf, who represents chaos without realizing it.
208The place re-creates its own Plantation, and from it this voiceless voice cries out. Plantations of the world, lonely places of
isolation, unnatural enclosures, that you, nonetheless are
touching. Mangos, bayous, lagoons, muskegs, ice fIoes. Ghettos, suburbs, Volga beaches, barrios, crossroads, hamlets,
sand trails, river bights. Villages being abandoned, ploughed
fields given over to roads, houses shut up against their surroundings, seers bellowing inside their heads.
1 leave you now, you who at no point leave the celebration
you provide us. Coing to acknowledge myself in the unclear
and so particular effervescence, of another sort, one with no
accumulation of forgetting, and unending because always
changing.
The horizon seaweed is interwoven in variations of gray
tinged blue with black, where space increases. Their fern
makes a rain that does not peel away from the heat of the sky.
With the dove gray of thought you touch a tousle of vegetation, a cry of morne and red earth. Clowing fires scarcely
sparked by dizziness. Rainshower rnotionless. Dwindling
echoes. A tree trunk slivers against the rim of the sun, stubbornness, stiff but melting. CalI the keepers of silence with
their feet in the river. CalI the river that used to spill over the
rocks. -As for myself, 1 have listened to the pulse of these
hot spots. 1 have bathed there beside friends, attentive to the
volcano's drums. We have stood bent against the wind without falling. One lone bay; whatever name it had evaporated.
Also endeavouring to point out this blue tinge to everything
... -Its sun strolls by, in the savanna's silver shuddering and
the ocre smell of the hounded earth.
209Notes
ERRANTRY, EXILE
1. While errance is usually translated as "wandering," "errantry" seems
better suited to Glissant's use of the word, and there is precedence
in translations of Césaire. Errance for Glissant, while not aimed like
an arrow's trajectory, nor circular and repetitive like the nomad's, is
not idle roaming, but includes a sense of sacred motivation. Trans.
2. The poet Monchoachi organized a series oflectures on the theme of
errantry, in Marin, a city in the southern part of Martinique. 1 was
one of the first, 1believe, called upon to discuss it in this setting. The
Caribbean is a land of rootedness and of errantry. The numerous
antillean exiles are evidence of this.
3. Kant, in the Critique ofPure Reason, presents what he says about Relation in this manner:
Unconditioned unity
of RELATION
that is
itself, not as inherent
but as
SL:BSISTENT.
(Pléiade, vol. 1; 1468)
"\Vhether this Relation works toward the systematic unity of ends
(moral principle) or toward the unity of understandings (architechtonic principle), one can assert here two qualities: first, that it is the
binding agent that guarantees the permanence of thought in the
individual; and, second, that it has no share in the substance. This
211difference that Kant seems to establish between substance and subsistence is invaluable. Be that as it may, the idea of Relation for him
does not intervene as an opening onto plurality, insofar as it would
be a totality. For Kant plurality takes place in time, not in space. In
space there is existence, which seems not to be differentiated within
itself.
4. The word 1 have translated here as "rerouting" is détournement, one
of a number of related words that are important in Glissant's work.
(Others are détourner; détour; retour.) Usually, 1 believe that Glissant
sees these words in a very active sense, implying a real change of
direction. This can be the act of taking another path, or forcing evolution to flow in a diflerent course. It can also be a turning away, or
turning aside in a redirection of, or refusaI to direct, attention.
There are times, for instance, in the slavc/master relation when
"diversion" in the sense of "providing amusement" was a tactical
move on the part of the slave, diverting the master from the slave's
actual desires or agenda, but in general 1 have tried to stress the
most active sense. Trans.
5. Here Glissant uses the verb comprendre in the mechanical sense of
including within a system, and compre/umds is the best translation. In
other cases, however, he stresses an almost rapacious quality of the
word, its division into two parts based on its Latin roots (i.e. comjmndre: to take with, which 1 have translated as "grasps"). He contrasts this with a neologistic phrase: donner-avec, which would constitute understanding in Relation. Because, in doing so, he means donnN both in the sense of generosity and in the sense of "looking out
toward" (as in la fenetre donne sur la mer), and because our combining
the words give and with constitutes less a notion of sharing th,m one
ofyielding (i.e., "he gave with the blow"), which-though not dominant-is not totally absent t'rom Glissant's usage, dOl117cHlVec will be
translated as "gives-on-and-with." Trans.
6. The poetic striving toward totality in no ,vay impugns the minutiae
of thosc who struggle in a given place. The subject matter is not in
conflict, and Saint-john Perse does not eclipse Faulkner. Rather, it is
possible that the harped-on universal, with \vhich Saint-john Perse
so splendidly thre\v his lot, scatters before Relation, without l'eally
coming in contact with it. Generalizing words do not ahvays accompany the cry of the peoples or countries naming themselves.
The spirit of universalization, moreover, is willingly connected
with a tendency to deny specifie times and histories that are periph-
212eral (Borges or Saint-john Perse), and the aspiration toward this
universal tends to disclaim particular spaces and evolutions (V. S.
Naipaul).
Numerous writers in our countries strive in similar ways. Rather
than dealing with their own fertile imperfections in their works, they
revel in the completed and reassuring perfections of the Other.
They caU them universal. There they find a bitter and legitimate
pleasure that gives them the authority to hold themselves above the
surroundings in which they might share. The distance they keep
from commonality thus leads them to judge quite dispassionately
whatever babbles there beside them. But their serene dispassion is
strained.
POETICS
1. Glissant's phrase word "full-sense" will appear throughout the text as
the translation of plein-sens. It indicates a combination of signification, direction, and concrete sensory perception. Trans.
2. In La conquete de l'Amérique (Editions du Seuil, 1982) (The Conquest of
America: The Question of the Other' [New York: Harper and Row, 1984],
trans. Richard Howard) Tzvetan Todorov studied one of the most
important manifestations of this relationship between the Same and
the Other: that which opposed the American lndians to the Conquistadors. He suggests that when they entered into this relation the
Indians reacted with a logic of totality, putting them in a situation of
technical inferiority when they confronted the Conquistadors, who
acted solely on the basis of a logic of self-interest ("There exist two
great forms of communication, one between man and man, the
other between man and the world, the Indians cultivated the latter
above aIl, the Spanish the former" [75]). Todorov infers from this
that, whereas from the point ofview of conquest the Indians, in fact,
suffaed a defeat that was the prelude to reshaping the Continent
and the start of a new history, on the other hand, from the point of
view of what 1 caIl here a worldwide Relation, their system of refa-
ence was the most durable (the most profitable?) one there is. He
thus took into account the state of the wodd, the stage at which we
are today, and, in proposing this perception of it, he does not place
greater importance on a (Western) "sense" in relation to a (global)
content; despite the daim that perhaps he never stopped being
213dcpcndent upon the "sense" Europe had assigned to the Other
(Deborah Root, "The Impnial Signifier: Todorov and the Conquest
of Mexico." Cullllia! Clitu!IlP [Spring 1988]).
;). Following Fran<;oise Lionnet's f-lne analysis of m/tissa{;p (/\lltobiographical l/()UfT Race, Gemie;; Sp!fPorliaiture [Ithaca: Cornell University Press, 1989], 1-29), 1 have chosen to retain the French term
here. The word has a \vide range of cllltllrally specific meanings, ail
value laden. ~lost English translations. sllch as ooss-hrenlingand mmlgrelizatioll, bear a negative value. (The product, mt'tis, is a "half~breed,
etc.") Crossing, lnaiding, and illlermixingare perhaps the most neutrai
but ignore the problematics of racial difference. Creolization works
but limits m/tissage tu a cultural context. For Glissant I!/hi~·.5(lge moves
t'rom a narrow range o{ racial interrnixing to become a relational
practice atllrrning the mllltiplicity and diversity of its components.
Tmlls.
4. Meanwhile. a book hy Jean Bernabé, Patrick Chamoiseau, and
Raphaël Confiant bas been published with the title 1::1oge rie la Créolité
(Paris: Gallimard, 1988). This manifesto attempts to define or proclaim the line of continuity in Maltinican litel'ature. This is the work
to which 1 rcfer when 1 compare the terrns creolization and creoleness.
5. Summari/ing thus:
Oral and written.
The emergence of the languages of orality accompanies a resnrgenee ofspoken poetr}', \vhich has become a much more widespread
practice, not without nurnerous shortcornings, of course. Anolher
economy ofpoctie speech is taking shape, in which recurrence (repetition or redundancy), assonance, variations in tonality, etc, are
becoming the approvcd methods. Maybe writing practices will find
themse1ves rej uvenated by this.
Multilingualism.
The thollght or the (:cntcr was m0l101ingual. The poetics ofRelation reqllires ail the languages of the world. Not 10 know or to ponder them. but lo know (feel) that it is essential for them tu exist.
Thal this existence determines the accents of any writing.
Voice-Ianguages ([angues) and Use-languages (langages)
There are communities of use-language that cross the harriers or
voice-Ianguage. 1feel doser to the writers of the English- or Spanishspeaking Caribbean (or, of course, Creole-speaking) than to most
214writers of French. This is what makes us Antillean. Our voice-languages are different, our use-language (beginning with our relation
to the voice-Ianguages) is the same.
Literary genres.
As it strives toward totality, literary work moreover forms the
ethnography of its own subject matter. We see a poem by Brathwaite
as the equivalent of a novel by Carpentier and an essay by Fanon. We
go even farther in not distin~uishing between genres when we deny
that their divisions are necessary for us or wheo we create different
divisions.
Present moment and duration.
The two "realities" of time, whether it is considered to be Iinear,
circular, cyc1ical, "natural," or "cultural." They determine the
accents of our poetics. Might it be said that a poetics of the present
moment would be blasphemous, while every poetics of duration
would consecrate sorne unanimity?
EXPANSE AND FILIATION
1. Daniel J. Boorstin, The Discoverers: A History of Man 5 SeaTch to Know
His World and Himself(NewYork: Random House, 1983),201. Trans.
CLOSED PLACE, OPEN WORD
1. This notion was expounded at length in Eloge de la Créolité by Jean
Bernabé, Patrick Chamoiseau, and Raphael Confiant (Paris: Gallimard, 1989). The volume, dedicated in part to Glissant, proposes a
transregional identit:y, history, and politics based on "creoleness"-a
concept that, for Glissant, does not have the suppleness of process
he finds in "creolization." Trans.
2. Saint:John Perse, Eloges and other Poems, Trans. Louise Varese (New
York: Bollingen/Pantheon, 1956), 17.
3. William Faulkner, lntruder in the Dus! (New York: Random House,
1948). Interestingly, in the French translation, which Glissant has
quoted here, this is far more explicit: "1 do not know him in the
least, and, as far as 1 know, there is no white man who does" (ml'
translation of the French version). Trans.
2154. Michael Dash, in his translation of Glissant's Caribbean Discoun"e (Di5-
tOurs antillais) (Charlottesville: University Press of Virginia, 1989),
translates détouras diversion and retouras reversion. This is particularly
interesting if one is attentive to the sense of version, thus, connecting
it with an important meaning of Relation, i.e., "telling." 1 believe,
however, that Glissant is vastly more interested in the movement
implicit in both détour and relour and, therefore, translates these
words as detourand return-or go !J(Uk, etc, in the case of the latter. In
this particular case, bccause noun and verb are identical in English,
they convey more action-which action might, of course, be one of
"diversion" or "distraction." See note 4 to the chapter "Errantry and
Exile." Trans.
CONCERNING THE POEM'S INFORMATION
1. The insertion of a text into a text, or the articulation of a part with a
whole, sometimes will run counter to the m'erall economy. This ref~
erence to French critics who thus proclaim the end of poetr-y is only
one relay for registering situations in the world, where poetry is on
the increase as a means of expression.
DICTATE, DECREE
1. Three related images of the world hypostasized by Glissant-la totalité-monde, les échos-monde. and le chaos-mande-have been Icft untranslated here, not only because of the inherent difficulty in translating
them but also because they function as neologisms that have tü be
accepted into the French, so why not into English as weil, since Glissant is working on languages in relation? Theil' structure cannot be
duplicated in English. The article clearly modifies the first element
(la totalité, les échos), but the second clement (monde) is not a mere
modifier, as it would appear to be if the normal English reversai of
terms took place (i.e., world-totality, world-echoes, world-chaos). In
fac:t, in this third instance all the implications of ordered chaos
implicit in chaos thenry would slip a,vay, leaving the banality of
world-disorder. Nor are these guises of the world (the world as totality, etc.); they are idcntities of the world. The world is totality,
216echoes, and chaos, aIl at once, depending on our many ways of sensing and addressing it. Trans.
TO BUILO THE TOWER
l. For Glissant, when these two words are set in contradistinction to
each other, langue is the language one speaks and langage is how one
speaks it. A langue may be a national language (French, Spanish,
etc.) or an imposed language (French in Martinique) or a dominated language (Creole). A langage is a way of using language that
can cross linguistic borders. Glissant shares a langage with writers
who do not write in French: Derek Walcott, José Maria de Heredia,
and Kamau Brathwaite, among others. In Le Discours antillais he
described the relation between these two terms: "the Creole langue,
which is natural to me, cornes at every moment to irrigate my written
practice of French, and my langage results from this symbiosis" (DA,
322; my translation). In Caribbean Discoufse Michael Dash renders
this distinction as "language" and "self~expression." It is perhaps an
expression of Glissant's langage that he prefers to see the distinctions
marked by composite words that indicate their fundamental connection; my translation of these words when they are set in this relation are language-voice (for langue) and language-use (for langage).
2. In Le Discours antillais 1 wrote: "1 speak to you in your language-voice
and 1understand you in my language-use" (322). When ail languages
are equivalent, the poet's language-voice gives-on-and-with [donne
avec] his language-use. For language··voice and language-use to be
no longer differentiated presupposes that every language-voice has
been set free as poetics. In the same way, to write is to experience
oneself as already inhabited, in joyful nostalgia, by aIl the languages
of the world.
TRANSPARENCY AND OPACITY
1. Charaudeau's proposition concerning situational competence in
the beginning student can be found in another form in an article by
Robert B. Kaplan: "Cultural Thought Patterns in Inter-Cultural Education," Language Leaming 16, nos. 1-2, 1-20. Kaplan examines the
217conditions for teaching English as a second language in the United
States. His general conclusion is that the foreign student, ,vho has
assimilated and mastered the ruIes perfcnly, nonethelcss is Ilot
imrnediately able to speak or write in the language: his or her situational competence-Kaplan doesn't use these words, but the idea 1S
the sarnc-needs to be developed by the teacher.
THE RELATIVE AND CHAOS
1. It was whell 1 was at UNESCO thal the constant rnisunderstanding
concerning these two senses of the word ('ultunJ (among many others) becarne connrrned for me. Sorne of the Western officiais who
had served in this organization a long time were ofIended hy the
arrivaI of citizens from the countries of the south, seeing this as a
sort of betrayal ofthe ideal of "culture" that, according to them, had
governed its foundation. Going even further, they put the cultures of
these countries, so obviously rernote from what they considered to
be hurnanistic accomplishment, in the same category as the various
government regimes in charge of them. Barbarism, consequently,
was pcnetrating the Institution, and you could hear these worthies
grumbling 10 themselves: "Soon we'U be working under coconut
palms." This mistake was two-pronged: "culture" was confused with
humanistic sophistication, and people's cultures were confllsed with
the governments ruling over them. Of course-and not to mention
that there is little to choose between underdeveloped dictatorships
in thei!" sphere and man)' political regimes that are apparently mllch
more civilized-it was not an innocent mistake.
For, if they had been willing to consider that a culture is a totality,
a participating écho-monde. by the same token they would have been
willing to rclinquish thcir exclusive privi1egc to "culture" and its
administration. And, if they substantiated the notion that culture
and government \vere cquivalent, there was every possibilit)', or reClson. to daim that this privilege should be maintained where it was,
in the narne of good "government of the things of this world."
Arrangements of this sort met with approval l'rom most of the
representatives of the wealthy nations, \vhich only allmved for suppOl-ting cultural assistance 10 pOOf' countries on a selective basis (the
only way they believed to be effective) and prekrably in a bilateral
context-in which fruitful negotiations were always possible.
218Moreover, any global analysis of the situation-what UNESCO
for a while summed up under the awkward title of "worIdwide problematics"-·was immediately pilloried by these representatives and
decIared useless or dangerous. Time and money wasted. It would,
however, have been a m~or accomplishment on the part of an institution of that nature to have woven the beginnings of this global
Relation.
Unfortunately, both the language conventions holding sway in
such a context (particularly the punctilious precautions necessarily
adopted to avoid shocking any of the parties involved) as weIl as the
great number of reservations were significant cLUbs on this attempt,
precisely at the point at which aIl the weaIth of the imagination and
of poetics should have been aierted. Poetics, in an international
Organization!
The stubborn-it could be considered heroic-determination of
Amadou-Mahtar M'Bow, the director general at the time, stemmed
in large part from his conviction that it was in the interest of everyone, developed countries and countries in the process of development (as they were described), to try to define the global interdependency of problems and, consequently, that there was a
multilateral necessity for solutions that might ensue from such an
analysis. The affluent nations acknowledge no such joint interest.
They are willing to distribute largesse but in proportion to friendly
cooperation.
It is one of the phenomena of society that organs of the Western
press seem to have constantly misinterpreted these facts. It is true
that the heart of the debate was not meant to fascinate public opinion and that it is far more entertaining and more striking to pay
attention to personalities or occasionaI conflicts presented in this
manner. The flash-agents of the media (see n. 1 in the chapter "Distancing, Determining") performed their function here and concealed beneath pseudo-force lines ("Crisis at UNESCO!") the real
ones. For example: "Preserve Freedom of the Press" obliterated the
real issue: "Find a new equilibrium in the space of the wodd for the
floods of information and their cultural cargo."
It was not an innocent mistake.
2. The terms lieu commun (common place) and lieu-commun (commonplace) are important for Glissant, and they are discussed at some
length in the chapter "Relinked (Relayed), Related." Their English
equivalents are less felicitous, perhaps, but common place can be
219understood as the place cornmon to coinciding cultures-the place
they share-and commonPlace exists in iL" commonplace sense as
banality. Trans.
DISTANCING, DETERMINING
1. Flash agents is my solution to Glissant's phrase "agents d'éclat." This
term in French is no more instantly legible than my English phrase;
gcnerally, however, the function performed by these flash agents is
defined by context. Constructed on the analogy of "press agents"
(agents de presse), the formula goes beyond our very general notion of
media to include a sense of instantaneous dazzlemcnt wiclded by
hegemonic agents. Trans.
RELINKED, (RELAYED), RELATED
1. In the French it is not clear that langage (use-language) is dominant
in this case or that longue (voice-Ianguage) is dominated, but Glissant cIarified this point for the translation. Trans.
2. One language's particularity-the addition in French of a hyphen
(tuming lieu romrmln [common place] into lieu-commun [commonplaceJ-allows me to venture a concept that goes beyond its occa··
sion. This is something that would be impossible if sabirs replaced
languages. Just think of the unimaginable reserves provided by the
world's languages to produce just such ways of going beyond themselves. How many idioms, dialects, would we not take for inspiration
to come back every time to mechanisms of Relation that cannot be
dismantled? Failing to attain this multiplicity, we attempt to reach it
from the very environment of the language in which we express ourselves. When we want to give-on-and-with multiplicity, we open the
linguistic bastion and in tum multiply the language that vve inhabit;
we open stars into it: into a use-language that, by shortcutting,
reassembles the language and scatters il.
FOR OPACITY
1. Comprehension could, of course, be translated as "comprehension" to
point out the mot connection with the French word comprendre,
220which l have earlier rendered as "to grasp" or, when the sense is
mechanical, as "to comprehend" (and once, at Glissant's behest, as
"to integrate"). In American English, however, the controlling attitude implied in this particular instance, vis-a-vis other people or cultures, is more apparent in understandingthan in comprehension. Trans.
OPEN CIRCLE, LIVED RELATION
1. Henri Meschonnic defines modernity by (among other things) a
return ofhistoricity. He thus seems to contradict the general CUITent
of structuralist thinking. But 1 sense--perhaps wrongly- that this
historicity is abstracted from the evolution of the world. We are summoned not so much by historicity as by the diffracted synchronicity
of peoples' histories. The active presence of these peoples is what
antihistorical thought has mutely impugned with its self-defensive
tactics. Historicity takes place only in liberated geographies.
Meschonnic, for example, deplores the excessive use in contemporary critical texts, of the word horizon. No doubt because he suspects there is a project there, the intention of conquest (one more
arrow-like nomadism), the breakthrough of an ideology or-coming down to the same thing-of a propagating ideal. The word horizon loses this meaning, however, when it is a question of the realized
horizon of the world. Would not modernity be the contradictory
and reflected totality of cultures? The horizon is how aIl these places
circle the planet. Though, in the meanwhile, humanity is updating
aH over again, in a deplorable manner, the old understanding and
usage of this word, by "projecting" against yet unimaginable places,
to the interplanetary horizon.
Perhaps modernity exists when a tradition functioning in a time and
place no longer gradually assimilates the changes offered, either
from within or from without, but adapts to them by violence. Violence does not in every instance mean a break, which could emerge
latently. But, because the violence of change has become widespread these days and increased its speed, it can be described as
absolutely modern.
Thus, sequences of modernity have laid the groundwork for
modernity. And the latter, extravagant and endogenous, is consumed in its predicates. Its duration is its extremity: the more
221modernity is fIaunted, the more it is llnrealized. Follmving this logic,
one could think of successive futures without moclernity or of
infinite modernities with no future.
\1\1hat Western cultures cali the postmodern is an attempt to fincl
an order in (and put sorne order into) this rcality that is cxperienced as chaos, without, howeyer, abandoning the eneq.,')' of this
chaos. An attcmpt to manage modcrnity hl' putting it in orcler. In
othe! words, anchoring oneself the hest one can in the continuum
of one's own production" That is, indeecl, one of the most ohviolls
temptations of postmodernism, which takes as its suhject the fUfmalist resurrection of the works and ornaments of the vVestern past,
adapted to the current magma. But, as we have previousll' suggestecl
on seyeral occasions, aesthetic and philosophical thoughts, no matter which culture engendered them, will have to break away from
the hinh of their own historl' alonc, to give-on-ancl-with eycry possible contamination. They will have to implement their Other of
thought. Currently, there are no signs of anl' appreciahle beginnings
of these self~breaks. Except perhaps in the West, and as if bl'
antiphrasis, the intellectual guest fur an pjJistenlOlogiml brmk, vvhateyer it mal' be and wherever it is brought to bear. is evidence of a
feeling [or (but also of a resentment against) this need to break with
the exclusivity of one's continuum.
2. Generalization has brought about sorne dramatic moments on the
planet.
Leon Trotsky's symbolic figure hovered ove!' the drama orthe dispersal of Trotskyitc intelligences and generosities.
Stalinism, bl' taking the Revolution back into a single country,
reactivated the gcncralizing universal-always cthnocentric and
absolute. The ThinI International was the tragic instrument of this
generalization.
Trotskyism, cleveloping the theory of permanent Revolution,
attempted to escape this generalizing universal and to replace it with
a concrete and re1ativi7ed universal.
But the liberations of nations cannot be programmed in a universaI manner. The Trotskyist perspective, which freed the lessons of
Marxism trom the straiqackeL of State nationalism, did not go f~tr
enough in its evolution.
Today we know that Marxist philosophy (or the philosophy of
Marx) was, like a1l philosophies of History, lincar (one Historl', one
222driving force: the cIass struggle; an agent: the proletariat; an end:
cIasslcss society) and ethnocentric (it moved from the outermost
parts of the world toward the great cities of Europe) . But it also took
its strength from an imaginary structure that had to have been its
first inspiration and that, beyond theory, presented the world as a
totality.
The idea of permanent Revolution, if it were to radiate outward
in contradiction, could not be merely ideological. It is the a priori
(the programmable calendar of liberation movements) one would
have had to go beyond in order to appreciate the extent to which
Marxist thought had contributed methodological progress in grasping situations. This thought contained seeds of the generalizing universaI: it authorized the Stalinist monstrosities. Whereas the Marxist
imaginary, if it had been separated from its obsession with seizing
power, would have had the opposite eHect, providing for Relation.
Trotskyism went Ütrther, but its tragedy lay in not making a systematic criticism of Stalinist ethnocentrism and not applying sorne
of this critique to Marxist theory itself, at least as this theor'y was
interpreted by the Russian revolutionaries.
This is why Trotskyism ran into the stubborn particularities of
specifie situations just about everywhere, in a dust of hernie, ridicu~
lous, and usually vague batdes.
That's aIl easy to say-and quickly said-today.
But it is true that this was an abortive érho-monde that left deep in
many the grip of regret and nostalgia.
3. Among these binarities, whether or not they can be transcended:
Matr'ix abyss, immeasurable abyss.
Arrowlike nomadism: -circulaI' nomadism.
Discovery, Conquest.
Linearity-circularity.
Filiation-extension.
Legitimacy-contingency.
Center: -peripheries.
DiHerences: singularities.
Transparency-()pacity.
Generalization-generality.
(Faulkner, Saint~John Perse.)
Classicisms-Baroque.
223Models-Echos-monde.
Relative: Chaos.
Totality: Relation.
Grasping (comprendre)-giving-on-and-with (donner avec).
Sense (in linear terms), the full-sense (in circularity).
Aesthetics of the universe: aesthetics of Chaos.
Voice languages: use-languages.
Writing: orality.
The instant, duration.
History-histories.
Root identity-relation identity.
Thought of the Other: -the Other of thought.
Assimilations--distancings that determine.
Relinked (relayed), Related.
Relay agents-flash agents.
Common place: commonplace.
Violence, deculturation.
Creolizations, errantry.
In this litany commas (,) indicate relation, dashes (-) opposition.
and colons (:) consecution.
224References
Is it not one of the conditions ofwriting today that it conceive
of itself as preceded by a pretext of discourse? In any case,
this is what usually happens: 1 accept invitations to expose
my points of view publicly whenever the proposed conference fits in with rny (nonprojectile) project. And sometirnes
the suggested theme will have a ripple effect, set rootlets, or
swerve in sorne new direction.
The public lecture functions as a sort of first draft to the
written text resulting from it. But this presentation will have
determined, meanwhile, the lineages of the text and oriented its economy. The practice ofwriting then will tighten,
or draw out, what the lecture brought to light. Preliminary
written texts sometirnes function in this process as
approaches that foretell and really provoke orality.
These two practices contribute to a phenomenon that is
no longer certifiably either "pure" writing or transcribed
orality. The consequence of this is that, with each edition of
such a text, if there happen to be any, the temptation arises
(by recalling these relayed techniques) to change-to perfect?-the letter of it, over and over again. What is related
thus varies (at the same tirne that the substance of Relation
moves) toward a perfectibility of expression that does not
arrive at an absolute. To what extremities can this go? What is
the limit? No doubt to the point where voice begins to fail
and the hand stops.
225The fülIowing are sorne of the occasions that have preceded (sometimes authorized) the work of overall elaboration for this volume.
"The Open Boat" (La Barque ollverte). Paper fur the colloquiurn "L'expcrience du gouffre" (Experience of the Abyss), Louvain, 19H6.
"Errantry, Exile" (L'errance, l'exil). Lecture given in 1987 as part of a
series on "L'errance," in :Vlartinique.
"Poetics" (Poétiques). A synthesis of two sets of observations given as
separate lectures at Temple University (Philadelphia) and Rice Cniversity (Houston) in 1988 and 1989. The final text was presented at
the University ofCalifornia at Berkeley in March 1990.
"A Rooted Errantry" (Une errance enracinée). The first version
appcared as the preface to "Pour Saint-John Perse," published by
GEREe (Groupe d'études et de recherches créolophones), Martinique, 198H.
"Closed Place, Open Word" (Lieu clos, parole ouverte). Given at the
Colloquiurn on the Plantation system, Center for French and Francophone Studies, Louisiana State University (Baton Rouge), April
1989.
"Concerning a Baroque Abroad in the World" (D'un baroque mondialisé) and "To Build the Tower" (B;ltir la tour) were rcworked from
texts that appearecl in I.e murrier de l'Unnco, 1985 and 1986.
"Concerning the Pocm's Information" (De l'information du poeme)
was first appl'Oached at the colloquium "Poésie ct informatique,"
Liege, 1984.
"Transparency and Opacity" (Transparence et opacité). Theme developed before the Congress of French Pmfessors of South America.
Bogota, 1982.
"The Relative and Chaos" (Le relatif et le chaos) is based on a paper
given befol'e the Association of Professors of Physical Chemistry of
Martinique, 19HO.
"Distancing, Determining" (Les écarts déterminants). Prcsentcd at a
meeting of l'Assaupamar (Association pour la Sauvegarde du Patrimoine Martiniquais), August 19H9.
226
